Project Gutenberg's A Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, by John R. Clark Hall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary
       For the Use of Students

Author: John R. Clark Hall

Release Date: March 7, 2010 [EBook #31543]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CONCISE ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Zoran Stefanovic, the Germanic
Lexicon Project, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.






[Transcriber's Note:

This text is intended for users whose text readers cannot use the "real"
(Unicode, UTF-8) version of the file. Some compromises have been made,
mainly in the spelling of Old English.

  --Where possible, macrons ("long" marks) are shown with circumflex
  accents: â ê î ô û
  --Long æ is split up as ¯æ, while long y is approximated with ý.
  (The dictionary rarely uses acute accents, and never for Old English.)
  --The "oe" ligature (rare) is shown in brackets as [oe].
  --Greek words and letters (also rare) have been transliterated and are
  shown between +marks+.
  --The "dagger" and "double dagger" symbols have been replaced with
  ¶ and § respectively; the + and ± symbols are as printed.

Unless otherwise noted, words are spelled and alphabetized as in the
original.

  The letter æ is alphabetized as "ae".
  The letter ð (eth) is alphabetized separately after "t".
  The letters j and v are not used; medial k occurs only once.
  When two words are otherwise identical, the one containing a macron
    is usually given second.

Cross-references are shown as printed. When there is an error or
ambiguity, corrections are given in [[double brackets]] at the end of
the entry or as a separate paragraph. Where possible, these standard
wordings were used:

  under "mûs"
    The referenced word is either a secondary entry or a parenthesized
    alternative spelling in the form "mûs (ý)".
  headword spelled "mûs"
    Minor difference, generally an added or omitted macron or
    a predictable vowel variation such as î for ý.
  form of "mûs"
    The referenced word is an inflected form. A few very common patterns
    such as adverbs in "-lîce" listed under adjectives in "-lic" are not
    individually noted.
  redirected to "mûs"
    The cross-referenced form leads to further cross-references.

To avoid empty cross-references, a few entries, clearly identified, were
restored from the first edition.

In the original book, shorter entries--chiefly cross-references--were
printed two or three to a line. They have been separated for this
e-text. All [single brackets], asterisks* and question marks? are in the
original.

In the body of the Dictionary, italics are shown conventionally with
_lines_, while small capitals are marked as #text#. Boldface in
headwords is unmarked; elsewhere it is shown as =text=. Superscript
numerals ("small superior figures") are shown with a caret; braces are
used when necessary to avoid ambiguity.

  âwrêon^1,2 = strong verb, class 1 or 2
  bærnett (y^2) = second syllable also spelled with y
  234^1 = page 234, line 1

Typographical errors are listed at the end of the e-text. To avoid
confusion with original brackets, anything added by the transcriber is
shown in [[double brackets]].

The _New English Dictionary_ (NED) is now known as the Oxford English
Dictionary (OED).]


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


A CONCISE

ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY




  CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

  C. F. CLAY, Manager
  London: FETTER LANE, E.C.
  Edinburgh: 100 PRINCES STREET

  [Illustration: Publisher's Device]

  Bombay, Calcutta and Madras: MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd.
  Toronto: J. M. DENT AND SONS, Ltd.
  Tokyo: THE MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA


  _All rights reserved_




  A CONCISE

  ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY

  FOR THE USE OF STUDENTS


  by

  JOHN R. CLARK HALL, M.A., Ph.D.


  Second Edition
  Revised And Enlarged


  New York:
  The Macmillan Company
  1916




  Cambridge:
  Printed by John Clay, M.A.
  at the University Press




PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


The first edition of this dictionary having been exhausted, it has been
extensively revised, and certain new features and alterations have been
introduced into it.

1. The principle of arranging all words according to their actual
spelling has been to a considerable extent abandoned. It was admittedly
an unscientific one, and opened the door to a good many errors and
inconsistencies. The head form in this edition may be either a
normalised form or one which actually occurs.

2. Words beginning with _ge-_ have been distributed among the letters of
the alphabet which follow that prefix, and the sign + has been employed
instead of _ge-_ in order to make the break in alphabetical continuity
as little apparent to the eye as possible. The sign ± has been used
where a word occurs both with and without the prefix.

3. References to Cook's translation of Sievers' _Anglo-Saxon Grammar_,
and to the Grammatical Introduction to Sweet's _Reader_ have been taken
out, as Wright's or Wyatt's _Old English Grammar_ will have taken their
place with most English students.

4. A new feature which, it is hoped, will prove widely useful, is the
introduction of references to all, or nearly all, the headings in the
_New English Dictionary_ under which quotations from Anglo-Saxon texts
are to be found. A vast mass of valuable information as to the
etymology, meaning and occurrence of Old English words is contained in
that Dictionary, but is to a very large extent overlooked because it is
to be found under the head of words which are now obsolete, so that
unless one happens to know what was the last form which they had in
Middle English, one does not know how to get at it. This information
will be made readily available by the references in the present work,
which will form a practically complete index to the Anglo-Saxon material
in the larger dictionary and will at the same time put the student on
the track of interesting Middle English examples of the use of Old
English words. Besides directing the reader (by means of quotation
marks) to the heading in the _New English Dictionary_ where the relevant
matter may be found, an indication has been given of the texts from
which quotations are made therein, when these do not exceed four or
five[1].

    [Footnote 1: As regards the letter W and some small parts of other
    letters which have not yet appeared in the _NED_, a reference has
    been given to its abridgement (_The Concise Oxford Dictionary_).]

5. There have been many valuable contributions to Anglo-Saxon
lexicography (by Napier, Swaen, Schlütter, Förster, Wülfing and others)
since the first edition of this Dictionary appeared, and these have been
made use of, but (as before) unglossaried matter has not been
systematically searched for words not hitherto recorded in Anglo-Saxon
Dictionaries[2].

    [Footnote 2: The part of the Supplement to 'Bosworth-Toller' which
    has already appeared shows that Professor Toller is examining such
    matter with great care and thoroughness.]

6. The number of references to passages has been very largely increased.
All words occurring only in poetical texts have been marked. If they
occur more than once they bear the sign ¶, if only once, a reference to
the passage is generally given. If not they are marked §. As regards
prose texts, the rule has been only to give references to particular
passages in the case of rare words,--more especially +hapax legomena+.
The references to AO, CP and Æ which were given in the earlier edition
have been retained, as a useful indication that the word occurs in Early
West Saxon or Late West Saxon prose, as the case may be.

7. By various devices it has been found possible, while much increasing
the amount of matter in the book, to add very slightly to the number of
pages, and at the same time to reduce the number of columns on a page
from three to two. Most of these devices are more or less mechanical,
but one method of saving space may be mentioned. Certain compound words,
descriptive of places, which, as far as I know, occur only in charters
and which may often be more correctly regarded as proper nouns, have not
been separately inserted. Their meaning can however always be
ascertained by referring to their components, and where the abbreviation
Mdf is inserted the reader will understand that examples of words so
compounded, or of the components, or of both, will be found in Birch's
_Cartularium Saxonicum_, or in Earle's _Land Charters_, and that
references to those examples are given in Middendorff's _Altenglisches
Flurnamenbuch_.

8. In the List of Abbreviations, etc. at the commencement of the book,
editions of texts which are furnished with a glossary have been
specially indicated.

    J. R. C. H.

    _January_, 1916.




LIST OF SIGNS AND ABBREVIATIONS WITH THEIR EXPLANATION


_Note_ 1. Where references are in _italic type_, quotations from the
texts indicated will be found in the _New English Dictionary_, under the
head of the English word which is distinguished in the article by
quotation marks (see Preface). In references to special passages volumes
have been marked off from pages by an inverted full stop, and lines or
verses have been shown, _where they follow other numerals_, by small
superior figures. Occasionally where lines have not been given, the mark
´ has been inserted to show that the quotation is in the lower half of a
page.

_Note_ 2. In the following list the number (1) after an edition of a
text indicates that the edition is supplied with a complete referenced
glossary or word-index, (2) that it has a complete glossary, but without
references and (3) that it has a partial glossary or word-index.

_Note_ 3. Some of the abbreviations given below are used in combination.
Examples: MtLR = the Lindisfarne and Rushworth MSS of St Matthew; BJPs =
the Bosworth and the Junius Psalters; asf. = accusative singular
feminine. EK = Early Kentish.

' ' Quotation marks are used to enclose the English words which should
    be looked up in the _NED_ in order to find etymological
    information as to, and examples of the use of, the Anglo-Saxon
    words to which the articles in this Dictionary relate, see Note 1
    above. If they enclose Latin words, they indicate the lemmata of
    Anglo-Saxon words in glosses or glossaries etc., or the Latin
    equivalent of such words in the Latin texts from which they are
    translated. The Latin is especially so given when the Ags. word
    seems to be merely a blindly mechanical and literal equivalent.

* is prefixed or affixed to hypothetical forms. Normalised forms of
    Ags. words which actually exist are not usually so marked.

´ See Note 1 above.

+ = ge-.

± indicates that the Ags. word to which it is prefixed is found both
    with and without the prefix ge-.

¶ = occurs in poetical texts only.

§ = occurs in a poetical text, and once only.

== This sign is used to indicate that the words which it follows,
    _and its compounds_, are to be found in the Dictionary under the
    heading given after it, thus meht==miht is equivalent to
    meht = miht _and_ meht- = miht-.


a. = accusative.

A = Anglian, or, if followed by numerals, Anglia, Zeitschrift für
Englische Philologie, Halle, 1877 etc. AB = Anglia Beiblatt.

Æ = Ælfric. (References followed by numerals in parentheses refer to
certain Homilies attributed to Ælfric in HL.) If followed by a book of
the Bible the reference is to that book in _Ælfric de vetere et novo
Testamento_ (Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 1).

#ÆGr# = Ælfric's Grammatik und Glossar, ed. J. Zupitza, Berlin, 1880.

ÆH = Ælfric's Homilies, ed. by B. Thorpe, London, 1844-6. (Quoted by
vol., page and line.)

ÆL = Ælfric's Metrical Lives of Saints, ed. W. W. Skeat (EETS),
1881-1900 (3).

ÆP = Ælfric's Hirtenbriefe (Ælfric's Pastoral Letters), ed. B. Fehr,
Hamburg, 1914 (Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 9).

AF = Anglistische Forschungen, ed. J. Hoops, Heidelberg.

#Alm# = the poem on Alms, in #Gr#.

#An# = the poem of Andreas, in #Gr#; or ed. G. P. Krapp, Boston, U.S.A.,
1905 (1).

#Andr# = the prose legend of St Andrew, in J. W. Bright's Anglo-Saxon
Reader, London, 1892 (1).

ANS = Herrig's Archiv für das Studium der neueren Sprachen, Brunswick,
1846-1914.

#AnT# = Analecta Anglo-saxonica by B. Thorpe, London, 1846 (2).

anv. = anomalous verb.

AO = Alfred's translation of Orosius, ed. H. Sweet (EETS), 1883.
(v. also Wfg.)

#Ap# = the poem of the Fate of the Apostles, in #Gr#; or included with
Andreas in Krapp's edition (v. #An#).

#APs# = the Arundel Psalter, ed. G. Oess (AF vol. 30), Heidelberg, 1910.

#ApT# = Anglo-Saxon version of Apollonius of Tyre, ed. B. Thorpe,
London, 1834.

AS = King Alfred's version of Augustine's Soliloquies, ed. H. L.
Hargrove (Yale Studies in Old English), Boston, U.S.A., 1912 (1). See
also #Shr#.

#Az# = the poem of Azarias, in #Gr#.

B = the poem of Beowulf, in #Gr#; also ed. A. J. Wyatt and R. W.
Chambers, Cambridge, 1914 (1); or ed. W. J. Sedgefield, Manchester, 1912
(1); or ed. Harrison and Sharp, Boston, U.S.A., 1888 (1).

#Bas# = The Admonition of St Basil, ed. H. W. Norman, London, 1840.

BB = Bonner Beiträge zur Anglistik, ed. M. Trautmann.

BC = Cartularium Saxonicum, ed. W. de Gray Birch, London, 1883 etc., 3
vols.

Bd = Bede.

BDS = Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache, ed. E. Sievers,
Leipzig, 1874-1914.

BH = the Anglo-Saxon version of Bede's Ecclesiastical History, 2 vols.,
ed. T. Miller (EETS), 1891-6. (Reference is usually made to the pages in
vol. 1 as regards the various readings recorded in vol. 2--not to the
pages in the latter vol.)

#Bk# = Texte und Untersuchungen zur AE Literatur, etc., by R. Brotanek,
Halle, 1913.

#Bl# = The Blickling Homilies, ed. R. Morris (EETS), 1874-80 (1).

#BlPs# = Blickling Glosses to the Psalms, at the end of #Bl#.

#Bo# = King Alfred's translation of Boethius, with the Metres of
Boethius, ed. W. J. Sedgefield, Oxford, 1899 (1).

#BPs# = die AE Glossen im Bosworth-Psalter, ed. U. Lindelöf (Mémoires de
la Soc. néo-philologique à Helsingfors, tom. 5), 1909 (3).

BR = An Anglo-Saxon Reader, ed. J. W. Bright, New York, 1913 or London,
1910 (1).

#Br# = the poem of Brunanburh, in #Gr# or ¶#Chr#.

BT = An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, by J. Bosworth and T. N. Toller, Oxford,
1882-98. BTSup. = the Supplement to the above, Part #I# (A-EORÐ), 1908.

CC = The Crawford Charters, ed. by A. S. Napier and W. H. Stevenson
(Anecdota Oxoniensia), Oxford, 1895.

CD = the Codex Diplomaticus, ed. Kemble

  [[This citation occurs a few times in error for the author's normal
  form, KC.]]

#Chr# = Two of the Saxon Chronicles Parallel, ed. J. Earle and C.
Plummer, Oxford, 1892 (1). The poetical passages are marked ¶#Chr#.

CM = the tract 'de Consuetudine Monachorum,' in Anglia, vol. 13, pp.
365-454.

#Cos# = Altwestsächsische Grammatik, by P. J. Cosijn, Haag, 1888.

cp. = compare.

CP = King Alfred's trans. of Gregory's Pastoral Care, ed. H. Sweet
(EETS), London, 1871.

Cp = the Corpus Glossary, in OET, or in WW (cols. 1-54) or (if the
numbers are followed by a letter), in A Latin-Anglo-Saxon Glossary, ed.
by J. H. Hessels, Cambridge, 1890 (1).

#CPs# = Der Cambridge-Psalter, ed. K. Wildhagen, Bibl. der Ags. Prosa,
vol. 7, Hamburg, 1910. (CHy = Cambridge Hymns in the same vol.) (3)

#Cr# = the poem of Crist, in #Gr#.

#Cra# = the poem of Men's Crafts, in #Gr#.

#Creat# = the poem of the Creation, in #Gr#.

Ct = Charters, wills and other like documents, as contained in BC, CC,
EC, KC and TC.

d. = dative.   dp. = dat. pl.   ds. = dat. singular; etc.

#Da# = the poem of Daniel, in #Gr#; or ed. T. W. Hunt (Exodus and
Daniel), Boston, 1885.  [[Sometimes writen #Dan# in body text]]

DD = the poem 'Be Dômes Dæge' ('de die judiciæ'), ed. J. R. Lumby
(EETS), London, 1876 (1); or in #Gr# (vol. 2, pp. 250-272).

#Deor# = the poem of Deor's Complaint, in #Gr# and #Kl#.

DHy = the Durham Hymnarium, ed. J. Stevenson (Surtees Society, vol. 23),
London, 1851. (#Gl#, by H. W. Chapman, Yale Studies, No. 24, Boston,
1905.)

#Dom# = the poem 'Be Dômes Dæge' from the Exeter Book, in #Gr# (Vol. 3,
pp. 171-4).

DR = the Durham Ritual, ed. T. Stevenson (Surtees Society), London,
1840. Lines of Anglo-Saxon only counted. [#Gl# by Uno Lindelöf, Bonn,
1901 (BB vol. 9).]

_Du._ = Dutch.

E = Early.

EC = Land Charters and other Saxonic Documents, ed. John Earle, Oxford,
1888 (3).

EETS = Early English Text Society's Publications.

EK = Early Kentish.

#El# = the poem of Elene, in #Gr#; or ed. Kent, Boston, 1889.

Ep = the Epinal Gloss., in OET.

#EPs# = Eadwine's Canterbury Psalter, ed. F. Harsley, EETS, London,
1889. (EHy = Hymns in the same vol.)

Erf = the Erfurt Gloss., in OET.

ES = Englische Studien, Heilbronn and Leipzig, 1876-1914.

EWS = Early West Saxon.

#Ex# = the poem of Exodus, in #Gr# or in Hunt's edition (v. #Da#). If
followed by two kinds of numerals = Exodus in _Ælfric de vetere et novo
Testamento_ in the Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, Vol. 1, Cassel, 1872.

exc. = except.

f. = feminine.   fp. = fem. plural.

FAp = the poem 'Fata Apostolorum,' in #Gr#.

FBO = Das Benediktiner Offizium, ed. E. Feiler (AF vol. 4), Heidelberg,
1901.

#Fin# = the poem of Finnsburg, in #Gr#, and most editions of Beowulf.

FM = The Furnivall Miscellany, Oxford, 1901.

FT = the poem 'A Father's Teachings,' in #Gr#.

g. = genitive.   gs. = gen. singular.   gp. = gen. pl.; etc.

G = the Anglo-Saxon Gospels, ed. W. W. Skeat, Cambridge, 1871-87. See
also LG, NG, RG, WG. (#Gl# to WG by M. A. Harris, Yale Studies, vol. 6,
Boston, 1899.)

GD = Die Dialoge Gregors den Grossen, ed. Hans Hecht (Bibl. der Ags.
Prosa, vol. 5), Cassel, 1900-1907.

#Gen# = the poem of Genesis, in #Gr#. If followed by two kinds of
numerals = Genesis in _Ælfric de vetere et novo testamento_ (Bibl. der
Ags. Prosa, vol. 1, Cassel, 1872).

_Ger._ = German.

GK = Grein's Sprachschatz der Ags. Dichter, revised by Köhler and
Holthausen, Heidelberg, 1912. (A complete referenced glossary to #Gr#.)

#Gl# = Glossary. Used also as a comprehensive sign for all or any of the
extant Anglo-Saxon glosses or glossaries: Cp, Ep, Erf, GPH, #HGl#,
#KGl#, Ln, OEG, WW etc.

#Gn# = The Gnomic Verses in #Gr#. #GnE# = those in the Exeter Book and
#GnC# those in the Cotton MS. Separate edition also by B. C. Williams,
New York, 1914 (1).

GPH = Prudentius Glosses, contributed by A. Holder to Germania,
Vierteljahrsschrift für deutsche Altertumskunde, vol. 11 (ns).

#Gr# = Bibliothek der Angelsächs. Poesie, ed. C. W. M. Grein and revised
by R. P. Wülker, Cassel, 1883-98.

#Gu# = the poem of St Guthlac, in #Gr#.

#Guth# = the (prose) Life of St Guthlac, ed. C. W. Goodwin, London, 1848
(pp. 8-98), or ed. P. Gonser (AF vol. 27), Heidelberg, 1909 (pp.
100-176).

#Hell# = the poem of Hell, in #Gr#.

#Hept# = The Heptateuchus, etc., Anglo-Saxonice, ed. Edw. Thwaites,
Oxford, 1698.

#Hex# = The Hexameron of St Basil, ed. H. W. Norman, London, 1849.

#HGl# = Glosses in (Haupt's) Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum, vol. 9
(1853).

HL = Homilien und Heiligendleben, ed. B. Assmann, Bibl. der Ags. Prosa,
vol. 3, Cassel, 1889. v. also Æ and #Shr#, (3).

#Hu# = the poem 'The Husband's Message,' in #Gr#.

Hy = the collection of 'Hymns' at the end of most of the Ags. versions
of the Psalms. v. the various Psalters (#Ps#). [The numbering of verses
etc. usually follows that in Wildhagen's Cambridge Psalter (#CPs#).]

i. = instrumental (case).

IM = 'Indicia Monasterialia,' ed. F. Kluge, in Techmer's Internationale
Zeitschrift für allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft, vol. 2, Leipzig, 1885.

intr. = intransitive.

JAW = Eigentümlichkeiten des Anglischen Wortschatzes, by R. Jordan (AF
vol. 17), Heidelberg, 1906

JGPh = Journal of (English and) Germanic Philology, Urbana, Ill.

Jn = the Gospel of St John. v. G and NG (JnL = Lindisfarne MS; JnR =
Rushworth MS, v. LG, RG).

#JPs# = der Junius-Psalter, ed. E. Brenner (AF vol. 23), Heidelberg,
1909 (JHy = the Hymns in the same vol.).

#Jud# = the poem of Judith, in #Gr#, or ed. A. S. Cook, Boston,
1889 (1).

#Jul# = the poem of Juliana, in #Gr#.

K = Kentish.

KC = Codex Diplomaticus Aevi Saxonici, ed. J. M. Kemble, 6 vols.,
London, 1839-48.

#KGl# = Kentish Glosses to the Proverbs of Solomon (= WW 55-88, or, if
quoted by number, in #Kl#).

#Kl# = Angelsächsisches Lesebuch, by F. Kluge, 3rd edition, Halle,
1902 (2).

#KlED# = F. Kluge's Etymologisches Wörterbuch, 7th edition, 1910, or
J. F. Davis' translation, London, 1891.

_L._ = Latin.

#Lcd# = Leechdoms, Wortcunning and Starcraft of the Anglo-Saxons, ed.
O. Cockayne, London, 3 vols., Rolls Series, 1864-66 (vol. 2, and pp.
1-80 of vol. 3 are referred to by the folio of the MS, so that the
references may also be available for G. Leonhardi's edition of that part
of the #Lcd#, in the Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 6) (3).

#Leas# = the poem 'Be manna lease,' in #Gr#.

Leo = Leo's Angelsächsiches Glossar. Halle, 1877.

  [[Listing added by transcriber; used only in first edition.]]

LG = the Lindisfarne Gospels, in Skeat's ed. of the Anglo-Saxon Gospels
(v. G). (Glossary by A. S. Cook, Halle, 1894.) LRG = Lindisfarne and
Rushworth Gospels. v. RG.

Lieb. = F. Liebermann (v. LL).

Lk = the Gospel of St Luke. v. G and NG (LkL = Lindisfarne MS; LkR =
Rushworth MS; v. LG, RG).

LL = the Anglo-Saxon Laws, as contained in Liebermann, Schmid or Thorpe.
If followed by numerals not in parentheses, or only partially in
parentheses, the reference is to 'Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen,' by
F. Liebermann, 2 vols., Halle, 1903-12 (1); if by numerals _entirely_ in
parentheses, to vol. 2 of 'Ancient Laws and Institutes,' by B. Thorpe,
2 vols., London, 1840 (3).

Ln = the Leiden Glossary, ed. J. H. Hessels, Cambridge, 1906 (1).

#Lor# = the Lorica Hymn, in Kleinere angelsächsische Denkmäler, by G.
Leonhardi (Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 6), Hamburg, 1905.

#LPs# = Der Lambeth-Psalter, ed. U. Lindelöf, Acta Soc. Sc. Fennicae,
vol. 35, Helsingfors, 1909 (1). (LHy = the Hymns in the same vol.)

LWS = Late West Saxon.

LV = Leofric's Vision, ed. A. S. Napier, in the Transactions of the
Philological Society for 1907-10, pp. 180-188.

M = Mercian.

m. = masculine.   ms., mp., etc. = masc. sing., masc. plur., etc.

#Ma# = the poem of the Battle of Maldon, in #Gr#, also in #Br#, #Kl# or
Sweet's Anglo-Saxon Reader, Oxford.

Mdf = Altenglisches Flurnamenbuch, by H. Middendorff, Halle, 1902. [See
Preface.]

#Men# = the Menologium, at the end of #Chr#.

#Met# = the Metres of Boethius; v. #Bo#.

MF = Festschrift für L. Morsbach (Studien zur Eng. Philologie, vol. 50),
Halle, 1913.

MFH = Homilies in MF, ed. Max Förster.

MH = An Old English Martyrology, ed. G. Herzfeld (EETS), London, 1900.
See also #Shr#.

_MHG._ = Middle High German.  [[Listing added by transcriber]]

Mk = the Gospel of St Mark; v. G and NG. (MkL = Lindisfarne MS; MkR =
Rushworth MS of St Mark; v. LG, RG.)

MLA = Publications of the Modern Language Association of America,
Baltimore.

MLN = Modern Language Notes, Baltimore, 1886-1914.

#Mod# = the poem 'Bi Manna Môd,' in #Gr#.

MP = Modern Philology, Chicago, 1903-1914.

Mt = the Gospel of St Matthew; v. G and NG. (MtL = Lindisfarne MS; MtR =
Rushworth MS of St Matthew; v. LG, RG.)

n. = nominative, _or_ neuter, _or_ note. (np., nap., etc. = nom. plural,
nom. and acc. plur., etc.)

N = Northumbrian.

#Nar# = Narratiunculae, ed. O. Cockayne, London, 1861.

NC = Contributions to Old English Lexicography by A. Napier, in the
Philological Society's Transactions for 1903-1906, London (mostly late
texts).

NED = the New English Dictionary, ed. Sir J. A. H. Murray and others,
Oxford, 1888-1915. (See Preface, and Note 1.)

neg. = negative.

NG = the Northumbrian Gospels, contained in Skeat's edition (v. G, LG,
RG).

#Nic# = the Gospel of Nicodemus, in #Hept#; or in MLA 13·456-541. (The
references to passages are always to the latter edition.)

NR = The Legend of the Cross (Rood-tree), ed. A. S. Napier, EETS,
London, 1894.

obl. = oblique.

occl. = occasional, occasionally.

OEG = Old English Glosses, ed. A. Napier (Anecdota Oxoniensia), Oxford,
1900 (1).

OET = The Oldest English Texts, ed. H. Sweet, EETS, 1885 (1).

_OF._ = Old French.  [[Rare, and always written OFr. in text]]

_OHG._ = Old High German.

_ON._ = Old Norse.

_OS._ = Old Saxon.

p. = page, _or_ plural.

#Pa# = the poem of the Panther, in #Gr#.

#Part# = the poem of the Partridge, in #Gr#.

#Ph# = the poem of the Phoenix, in #Gr# or BR.

pl. = plural.

#PPs# = the Paris Psalter, ed. B. Thorpe, London, 1835. The prose
portion (Psalms 1-50) also ed. Bright and Ramsay, Belles Lettres Series,
Boston, 1907, and the remainder (verse portion) in #Gr#.

#Ps# = any one or more of the Anglo-Saxon Psalters. [NB. In the
numbering of the Psalms, the Authorised Version is usually one ahead
of the MSS.] v. A, B, C, E, J, L, R, S and VPs; also Hy.

  [[The occasional form #Pss# was retained. It may be either an error
  for #Ps# or short for "several Psalters". In the one OED reference,
  two Psalters are quoted.]]

PST = Philological Society's Transactions (v. also LV and NC).

QF = Mone, Quellen u. Forschungen zur Geschichte der teutschen Lit. u.
Sprache, Aachen und Leipzig, 1830.

RB = der Benedictinregel, ed. A. Schröer, Bibl. der Ags. Prosa, vol. 2,
Cassel, 1885-8 (3).

RBL = the Anglo-Saxon and Latin Rule of St Benet (Interlinear Glosses),
ed. H. Logeman, EETS, London, 1888.

#Rd# = The Riddles of the Exeter Book, in #Gr#, or ed. F. Tupper Junr.,
Boston, 1910 (1).

RG = the Rushworth Gospels, in Skeat's ed. of the Anglo-Saxon Gospels
(v. G). Mt (all), Mk 1-2^15 and Jn 18^1-3 are in a Mercian dialect, and
are usually known as R^1; the rest (R^2) is in a Northumbrian dialect
(v. also LG). Glossary to R^1 by Ernst Schulte, Bonn, 1904; to R^2 by U.
Lindelöf, Helsingfors, 1897.

#Rim# = the Riming Poem, in #Gr#

  [[Listing added by transcriber. The Riming Poem is included in Grein
  along with many other texts from its original source, the Exeter MS.]]

#Rood# = the poem 'Dream of the Rood,' in #Gr#.

#RPs# = der Regius-Psalter, ed. F. Roeder (Studien in Eng. Philologie,
vol. 18), Halle, 1904. (RHy = the Hymns in the same vol.)

RSL = Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature, London.

#Ruin# = the poem of the Ruin, in #Gr#.

#Run# = the Rune-poem, in #Gr#.

s. = strong; also = singular.   sv. = strong verb.   swv. = strong-weak
verb.

#Sat# = the poem 'Christ and Satan,' in #Gr#.

sb. = substantive.

#Sc# = Defensor's Liber Scintillarum, ed. E. Rhodes, EETS, London,
1889 (3).

#Seaf# = the poem of the Seafarer, in #Gr#.

sg. = singular.

#Shr# = the Shrine by O. Cockayne, London, 1864-70 [pp. 29-33 and 46-156
= MH; pp. 35-44 = HL pp. 199-207; pp. 163-204 = AS].

SHy = Surtees Hymnarium = DHy.

SkED = An Etymological English Dictionary by W. W. Skeat, Oxford, 1910.

#Sol# = the poem Solomon and Saturn, in #Gr# (if in italics, the
reference is sometimes to the prose version, ed. J. M. Kemble).

#Soul# = the poem of the Soul, in #Gr#.

#SPs# = Psalterium Davidis Latino-Saxonicum, ed. J. Spelman, London,
1640. (Stowe MS, but includes marginal readings from _APs_, _CPs_ and
_EPs_.)

Swt. = The Student's Dictionary of Anglo-Saxon by H. Sweet, Oxford,
1897.

TC = Diplomatarium Ævi Saxonici, ed. B. Thorpe, London, 1865 (3).

tr. = transitive.

usu. = usual, usually.

v. = vide, _or_ very.

v.l. = varia lectio.

#VPs# = the Vespasian Psalter, as contained in OET (1). [VHy = Hymns at
the end of the Psalter.] Glossary also by Conrad Grimm (AF, vol. 18),
Heidelberg, 1906.

V^2Ps = Psalter-Glosses in Cotton Vitellius E 18 (noted by Wildhagen
in _CPs_).

w. = with.

W = (I) Wulfstan's Homilies, ed. A. Napier, Berlin, 1883. Glossary by
L. H. Dodd, New York, 1908. (II) West Saxon.

#Wa# = the poem of the Wanderer, in #Gr#.

#Wald# = the poem of Waldhere, in #Gr#.

Wfg = die Syntax in den Werken Alfreds, by J. E. Wülfing, Bonn,
1894-1901 (copious material, and indexes to words in AO, BH, _Bo_, CP,
AS, _PPs_, etc.).

WG = West Saxon Gospels (v. G).

#Whale# = the poem of the Whale, in #Gr#.

#Wid# = the poem of Widsith, in #Gr#, or ed. R. F. Chambers, Cambridge,
1912.

#Wif# = the poem of 'the Wife's Complaint,' in #Gr#.

WS = West Saxon.

Wt = An Old English Grammar by J. and E. M. Wright, 2nd edition, Oxford,
1914.

WW = Old English Vocabularies, ed. by T. Wright and R. P. Wülker,
London, 1884. Cols. 1-54 = Cp; 55-88 = #KGl#; pp. 89-103 = _Colloq.
Monast._ in NED.

Wy = the poem 'Be manna wyrdum' in #Gr#.

ZDA = Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum, Leipzig and Berlin, 1853-1914.

ZDPh = Zeitschrift für deutsche Philologie, Halle, 1869-1914.




ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS

  [Transcriber's Note:
  This section is included for completeness. All changes have been
  made in the text.]

âbrytan...#SPs# _should be_ âbrýtan...#EPs#.

âcweorran: _for_ #SPs# _read_ #ELPs#.

æfest: for _Ei_ read _El_.

æfgerefa: _for_ LkL 12^42 _read_ LkL 12^58.

æfterlêan: _add_ #Gen# 76.

ælmesfeoh: add _LL_.

ærendung: add _RB_.

æscwiga: _for_ § _read_ ¶.

âfaran: add _Da_ 6.

âgniend: _possession_ should be _possessor_.

âgniendlîc _should be_ âgniendlic.

âgryndan: _add_ #Men# 111.

âhwylfan: add _to roll to_ MP 1·592.

antemnere, antifonere (ÆP 154^6) = antefnere.

âsanian: _add_ LV 57.

âsprêadan: _for_ #CSPs# _read_ #EPs#.

âstîgnes: _for_ #SPs# _read_ #EPs#.

âtilian _should be_ âtillan.

âtlêag: _add_ EC 448^9.

âtorgebl¯æd n. _swelling caused by poison_, #Lcd# 162b.

âðecgan: add _oppress?_ (Tupper) #Rd# 1^2,7.

âðynnian: _for_ VHy _read_ DHy 8^10.

âwarnian: _read_ (#APs#) = âswârnian.

+bearded _having a beard_, GD 279^14.

besârgung: strike out _sorrowing_, VHy.

besceawere: _for_ VHy _read_ DHy 24^15.

besencan: add _plunge into (fire)_, GD 317.

bîegan: _add_ +býged _bowed down, infirm_, #Nic# 471^29.

blîðe: _add_ (+b. occurs at #Guth# 161^9).

crûc: _add_ LV 74.

cwême- = cwêm-

+dal n. _part_, GD 311^11.

dalmatice: _omit_ ? _and add_ GD 329^34.

+drêog II.: add _gentle (horse)_, GD 78^12.

êðian _should be_ ±êðian.

+fadung: add _rule, dominion_.

f¯æmne(n)dlic (GD) = f¯æmnhâdlic

f¯ærærning f. _quick marching_, GD 14^24.

fæsting f. read _commendation, trust, guardianship_, GD 239^15; LL
58[17].

fæstnung: add _exhortation_, MkL p2^5: _monument_, MtL p5^4; Mk 5^5.

fantbletsung f. _consecration of water for baptism_, ÆP 188^12.

feohtling: _add_ MP 1·610.

ferhtlic: _add_ #PPs# 95^10.

feriend: _add_ #Sol# 80.

flogettan: substitute _to fly, flutter_, #Sc#; GD 100^19.

folclic: add _worldly, secular_, GD 209^13.

fordêmednes: _add_ GD 345^3.

forecweden _aforesaid_, GD 12; 344.

forehûs: _add_ LV 33.

forewîtung _should be_ forewitung.

forlætednes (GD 227^16) = forlætennes

forr¯æda? m. _traitor, plotter_, MP 1·592.

forsegenlic (GD 233^21) = forsewenlic

forðfromung: _for_ #CSVPs# read #CVPs#.

forðman: _add_ NC 289.

forððêon _to profit_ ('_proficere_'), GD 200.

fullfremed: _add_ -lîce _after_ adv.

fullhâl _thoroughly well_, GD 248^1.

fyrdgestealla, fyrdgetrum: _add_ ¶.

+gang: add _passage (lapse) of time_, GD 179^10.

geadrung f. _text_, MtL p8^17.

geancyme: _delete second line of article_.

gearowyrdig: _add_ #Mod# 51.

gêodæd: add ¶.

geondflôwende _ebbing and flowing_, OEG 2363.

geondlâcan: _add_ #Ph# 70.

geondsendan: omit ¶.

gest-: _for_ g¯æst- _read_ gæst-

giestran: _add_ #Rd# 41^44.

glæsfæt: _add_ GD 10^16.

glômung: for _VHy_ read _DHy_; GD.

godwebben: _add_ GD 176^1.

hæftnîednes: _add_ GD 346^22.

±hæftnîedan _should be_ +hæftnîedan.

hâlettan _should be_ ±hâlettan.

heals-iendlic, -igendlic: for #SPs# 89^13 read #APs# 89^13: _imploring_,
GD 17^23.

hellegæst: _strike out_ ¶.

hellegeat: _add_ MP 1·610.

hellestôw f. _infernal region, hell_, GD 332^10.

hîwcuðlic: add _familiar_, GD 32.

hnep (GD 186^27) = hnæpp

horsðegn: add _muleteer_, GD 191^23.

hrêðnes: _add_ ÆP 136^23.

hûselbox _receptacle of the host_, ÆP 178^6.

hwîlsticce: _add_ GD 254^24.

+hyldelic _secure, safe_, GD 348^10.

+îeðan: add _compassionate_, GD 216(ý).

Additional references to the NED:--bebod '_bibod_'; belûcan '_belouke_';
cempa '_kemp_'; cennan '_ken_'; clipung '_cleping_'; cnæpp '_knap_';
dihtere '_dighter_'; draca '_drake_'; dysgian '_dizzy_'; f¯æcne
'_faken_'; forhogian '_forhow_'; forwiernan '_forwarn_'; gafol
'_gavel_'; glêaw '_glew_'; heonon '_hen_'; hlêo '_lee_'; hliehhan
'_laugh_'; hrêof '_reof_'; hryre '_rure_'; huru '_hure_'; ierre
'_irre_'; lûtan '_lout_'




A CONCISE

ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY




=A=


a prep. [= on] _on, at, in, to, for_.

â I. (âwa, ô) adv. _always, ever, at all, continuously, for ever_, Æ,
AO, CP. â on êcnisse; â butan ende _world without end_: _at any time_:
_in any degree_. [_ON._ ei, ey] II. f. = ¯æ

â- (unemphatic verbal prefix); I. orig. = _forth, away_, but as a rule
only intensitive in meaning. II. = on- III. ym(b)- IV. = â (I.) in
pronouns and participles, and gives a sense of indefiniteness. V. = ¯æ-

â¯ælan = on¯ælan

â¯æðan = âîeðan

âb = ôweb

âbacan^6 _to bake_, ÆH 2·268^9.

âb¯ædan _to compel, restrain, ward off_: _exact, take toll_: _force out,
extract_.

âbæligan = ¯æbylgan

âb¯æran _to disclose, bring to light_, DD 41.

âbære (W 274^24) = ¯æbære  [[headword spelled "¯æb¯ære"]]

âbærnan = onbærnan

abal (#Gen# 500) = afol

âbannan^7 _to summon, convoke, command_: _announce, proclaim_. â. ût
_call out, assemble_, _Chr_. ['_abanne_']

âbarian _to lay bare, disclose_.

abbad, abbod, abbot == abbud

abbud (a, o) m. '_abbot_,' _BH, Chr_; Æ. [_L._ abbatem]

abbuddôm m. _abbatial jurisdiction_, BH.

abbudesse f. _abbess_, #Chr#.

abbudhâd m. _abbatial rank, dignity_, LL.

abbudlêast f. _lack of an abbot_, BC 1·155´.

abbudrîce (o) n. _abbey, abbacy, office or jurisdiction of an abbot_
(used even of a convent of nuns).

âbêatan^7 _to beat, strike, break to pieces, make to fall_, _Cr_.
['_abeat_']

âbêcêdê f. _ABC, alphabet_.

âbedecian (eðe-) _to get by begging or asking_, #Bo# 71^12.

abedisse = abbudesse

âbêgan = âbýgan

âbelgan^3 _to make angry, irritate, offend_, _Sol_; Æ, AO, CP: _hurt,
distress_: _be angry with_. ['_abelgen_']

âbêodan^2 _to order, proclaim, bid, command, direct_: _summon, call
out_: _announce, relate, declare, present, offer_, _AO_; Æ. h¯æl â. _to
wish one good luck, greet, bid farewell to_. ['_abede_']

âbeofian = âbifian

âbêogan = âbûgan

âbeornan^3 _to take fire_, #PPs# 105^16.

âbêowan (WW 217^46) = âbýwan

âberan^4 _to bear, carry_: _endure, suffer_, _Mt, Bo_; Æ, CP: _bear
(a child)_, Æ: _take away, remove_: _reveal_: (refl.) _restrain
oneself_: _do without_, NC 268.

â-berd, -bered _crafty, cunning_.

âberendlic _bearable_.

âbernan (N) = âbeornan

âberstan^3 _to burst out, break out_, Æ, CP: _break away, escape_. ût â.
_break out_.

âbeðecian = âbedecian

âbicgan = âbycgan

âbîdan^1 _to 'abide,' wait, remain, delay, remain behind_, AO:
_survive_: _wait for, await_, Æ: _expect_, _Mt_ 11^3.

âbiddan^5 _to ask for, request, require, demand, pray, pray to, pray
for_, Æ: _get by asking, obtain_, Æ, AO, CP: _call out (an army)_.

âbifian (eo) _to tremble, quake, shake_.

âbilgð, âbilhð = ¯æbylgð

âbiran = âberan

âbiring = âbyrging

âbisg-, âbiseg- = âbysg-

âbîtan^1 _to bite in pieces, tear to pieces, devour, gnaw_, Æ, AO:
_taste, partake of, consume_.

âbit(e)rian _to turn bitter_, CP 341^24: _embitter_.

âbitt = âbit

âbîtt = âbît

  [[The first edition gives "âbit" as a form of "âbiddan",
  "âbît" as a form of "âbîdan" or "âbîtan".]]

âblâcian _to become pale, grow faint_: _become tarnished_, CP 135^2.

âbl¯æcan _to bleach, whiten_, #BJPs# 50^9.

âbl¯æcnes f. _pallor, gloom_, #Lcd# 1·294.

âbl¯æcung f. _pallor_, #HGl# 518.

âbl¯æst _inspired, furious_.

âblâwan^1 _to blow, blow away, breathe upon_, _Æ_: _puff up, swell_,
_Lcd_ 93b. ['_ablow_']

âblâw-nes, -ung f. _inflation_, #Lcd#.

âblegned _ulcerated_, #Lcd#.

âblendan _to blind, put out the eyes of_, Æ, CP: _dazzle, deceive,
delude_, _Æ_. ['_ablend_']

âblêred _bare, uncovered, bald_. [blêre]  [[headword spelled "blere"]]

âblîcan^1 _to shine, glitter_.

âblicgan = âblycgan

âblignes = ¯æbylgnes

âblindan _to make blind_, #Bl# 151^4.

âblindian = âblendan

âblinnan^3 _to cease, leave off, desist_, Æ, AO, CP.

âblinnednes f. _cessation, interruption_, A 5·465.

âblinnendlîce _indefatigably_, #HGl# 429^32.

âblinnendnes = âblinnednes

âblisian (Æ) = âblysian

âblissian _to make glad, please_, GD 335n.

âblongen = âbolgen, pp. of âbelgan.

âblycgan (i) _to grow pale_, Æ: _make afraid_.

âblynnan = âblinnan

âblysian _to blush_.

âblysung f. _blushing, shame_, RB 133^11.

âbodian _to announce, proclaim_, LkR 12^3.

âbolgennes f. _irritation_, WW 230^19.

âborgian _to be surety for_, LL: (w. æt) _borrow_.

âborian = âbarian

âbracian _to engrave, emboss_.

âbr¯ædan I. _to spread out, dilate_: _stretch out_, Æ. II. _bake_, #Lcd#
44a.

âbraslian _to crash, crackle_, GD 236^12.

âbrêac pret. 3 sg. of âbrûcan.

âbrêat pret. 3 sg. of âbrêotan.

âbrecan^4 _to break, break to pieces, break down, conquer, capture,
violate, destroy_, Æ, AO, CP: _break away from_.

âbrêdan^3 _to move quickly, draw, unsheath, wench, pull out_, _Mt_:
_withdraw, take away, draw back, free from_, Æ, AO. ûp âbroden _drawn
up, raised up_: _start up, awake_. ['_abraid_']

âbredwian _to lay low, kill_, B 2619.

âbrêgan _to alarm, terrify_.

âbregdan = âbrêdan

âbrêotan^2 _to destroy, kill_.

âbrêotnes f. _extermination_, OET 182.

âbrêoðan^2 (intr.) _to fail, decay, deteriorate, perish, be destroyed_,
_Ma_; Æ. âbroðen (pp.) _degenerate, reprobate_, _ÆGr_. (tr. and wk.)
_destroy_. [v. '_brethe_']

âbrerd- = onbryrd-

âbroðennes f. _baseness, cowardice_, W.

âbrûcan^3 _to eat_, A 11·1^17.

âbryrd- = onbryrd-

âbrýtan _to destroy_, #EPs# 36^9.

âbûfan (= on-) adv. _above_, #Chr# 1090#e#.

âbûgan^2 (= on-) _to bow, incline, bend, submit, do reverence_, _B,
ChrL_; Æ: _swerve, turn (to or from)_, _deviate_, CP: _withdraw,
retire_: _be bent or turned, turn one's self_. ['_abow_']

âbunden _unimpeded_.

âbûrod _not inhabited_, TC 162^28.

âbûtan, -bûten, -bûton. I. prep. acc. _on, about, around, on the
outside, round about_, _CP, ChrL, Æ_. II. adv. _about, nearly_, _ChrC_.
[= onbûtan; '_about_']

âbycgan _to buy, pay for, requite_: _redeem_: _perform, execute_.

âbyffan _to mutter_, WW 447^24.

âbýgan (ê) _to bend, deflect_: _subdue, bring low_: _convert_.

âbýgendlic v. un-â.

âbylg-, âbylig- = ¯æbylg-

â-byrgan, -byrian _to taste, eat_.

âbyrging (-iri-) f. _taste_.

âbysgian _to busy, occupy, employ_: _engage in, undertake_: _take up,
fill_, GD.

âbysgung f. _occupation_: _trouble_.

âbýwan (êo) _to rub off, polish, cleanse, purify_.

ac I. conj. _but_: _but also, moreover, nevertheless, however_:
_because, for_ (?): _and_ (?), #An# 569. ac gif _unless, except_, #Bl#
151. [_Goth._ ak] II. interrog. particle, _why, wherefore, whether_: in
direct questions = _L. nonne, numquid_.

âc f. gds. and np. ¯æc '_oak_,' _Æ, Ct, Lcd_; Mdf: (§) _ship of oak_:
(w. nap. âcas) _name of the rune for =a=_. [_OHG._ eih]

âc¯ægan = âcîgan

âc¯æglod '_serratus_,' #Nar# 20^26.

âcænn- = âcenn-

âcærran = âcirran

âcalan^6 _to become frost-bitten_, #Lcd# 2b.

acan^6 _to 'ache,' suffer pain_, _Æ_.

acas, acase f. (NG) = æcs

âcbêam m. _oak-tree_.

accent m. _accent_. [_L._]

accutian ?= âcunnian

âccynn n. _a kind of oak_, WW 430^6.

âcdrenc m. _oak drink, drink made from acorns_?, WW.

ace = ece

âcealdian _to become cold_, _Æ, CP_. ['_acold_']

âcêapian _to buy off, buy out_.

âcêlan _to cool off, still, quiet_, _Met_. ['_akele_']

âcelma = ¯æcelma

âcen = ¯æcen

âcennan _to bring forth, produce, renew_, _Bo, WG_; Æ: _attribute to_.
['_akenne(d)_']

âcennedlic _'genuinus,' native_, OEG.

âcennednes (_WG_; _Æ_), -cennes (_CP, NG_; AO) f. _birth_.
['_akenn(ed)nes_']

âcennend m. _parent_, DR 197^11.

âcennicge f. _mother_, DR.

âcenning f. _birth_, #Bk# 16.

âcêocian (tr.) _to choke_: (intr.) _burn out_.

âcêocung f. '_ruminatio_,' WW 179^2.

âceorfan^3 _to cut off, hew down_, AO, CP. onweg â. _to cut away_. of â.
_to cut off_, AO.

âcêosan^2 _to choose_, AO, CP.

acer = æcer

âcerr- = âcirr-

âcîgan _to call, summon_.

âcirran (e, y) (tr.) _to turn, turn away or aside_: (intr.) _turn
oneself, go, return_.

âcirrednes v. onweg-â.  [[headword spelled "onwegâcyrrednes"]]

âcl = âcol

âcl¯æc == âgl¯æc

âcl¯ænsian _to cleanse, purify_, Æ.

âclêaf n. _oak leaf_, #Lcd#.

âclêofan^2 _to cleave_, EC 351^10.

âcleopian _to call out_, WW 378^5.

+âclian ¶ _to frighten, excite_. [âcol]

âclungen _contracted_, WW 239^37. [clingan]

âcmelu n. _acorn meal_, #Lcd#.

âcmistel f. _mistletoe_, #Lcd#.

âcn- = êacn-

âcnâwan^1 _to know, recognise, understand_.

âcnyssan _to drive out, expel_, #SPs# 35^13.

âcofrian _to recover_, _Lcd_. ['_acover_']

âcol ¶ _affrighted, dismayed_.

âcôlian _to grow cold_, CP.

âcolitus m. _acolyte_, LL [_L._].

âcolmôd ¶ _fearful minded, timid_.

+âcolmôdian _to cast down, sadden_, WW 209^16. [âcol]

âcordian _to make terms, reconcile_, #Chr# 1120.

âcorenlic _eligible, worthy of choice_, CP 409^36.

âcostnian _to try, test, prove_, CM, WW.

âcræftan _to think out, devise_, AO 46^29.

âcrammian _to cram_, WW 236^10.

âcrêopian _to creep, crawl_, Æ.

âcrimman^3 (y) _to cram, stuff_, WW.

âcrind f. _oak bark_, #Lcd#.

âcrummen pp. of âcrimman.

acs = æx

âcs- = âsc-

acse = asce

âctân m. _oak-twig_, #Lcd#.

âctrêo n. _oak-tree_, #Wif# 28^36.

âcucian (Æ) = âcwician

âcul = âcol

âcuma (Æ) = âcumba

âcuman^4 _to come, come forth (from)_, Æ: _bear, bring_: _endure,
withstand_, Æ: _get to or from, reach_, _Gen_. ['_acome_']

âcum-ba m., -be fn. _'oakum,' hards, tow_, _Lcd, OEG, WW_: _ashes of
oakum_: _parings, clippings_. [cemban]

âcumendlic _tolerable_, Æ: _possible_.

âcumendlîcnes f. _possibility_.

âcunnan (NG) = oncunnan

âcunnian _to try, test, prove_: _experience_, CP.

âcunnung f. _experience, trial_, GD.

âcusan _to accuse_, MtL 12^10 [_L._].

âcwacian _to tremble_.

âcwæncan = âcwencan

âcweccan (tr.) _to move, swing, shake, vibrate_, _Ma_; Æ: (intr.)
_quiver_, Æ. ['_aquetch_']

âcwelan^4 _to die, perish_, Æ, AO, CP.

âcwellan _to kill, destroy_, _JnL_; Æ, AO, CP. ['_aquell_']

âcwellednes (eæ^2) f. _slaughter_, #EPs# 43^22.

âcwencan _to quench, extinguish_, _Mt_; AO. ['_aquench_']

âcweorna m. _squirrel_, _Gl_. ['_aquerne_']

âcweorran^3 _to guzzle, gorge_, #ELPs# 77^71.

âcwern = âcweorna

âcwerren = âcworren pp. of âcweorran.

âcweðan^5 _to say, speak out, declare, utter, express, answer_, _Gen_:
_reject, banish_, #Gen# 304. ['_acweath_']

âcwician (tr.) _to quicken, vivify_, _Ps_: (intr.) _revive_, _BH_.
['_aquick_']

âcwînan^1 _to dwindle away, disappear, go out (of fire)_, BH, #LPs#.

âcwincan^3 _to vanish, be extinguished or eclipsed_.

â-cwucian, -cwycian = âcwician

âcwudu m. _an oak wood_, KC 6·218^19.

âcwylan = âcwelan

âcwylman _to kill, slay_.

âcwylmian _to be tormented_, W 220^5.

âcwyncan = âcwencan

âcynned = âcenned pp. of âcennan.

âcyrr- = âcirr-

âcýðan _to show, proclaim, reveal, announce, confirm, prove_.

âd mn. _heap, funeral pile, pyre_: _fire, flame_. [_OHG._ eit]

âd¯ælan _to divide, separate_.

âdêadian _to fail, decay, mortify, become torpid or callous_, Æ.

âdêafian _to became deaf_, WW 179^25.

âdêafung f. _deafening, making deaf_, _Lcd_. [v. '_adeave_']

âdel I. = âdl. II. = âdela

âdela m. _mud, dirt, filth, filthy place_, _Æ_. ['_addle_']

âdelfan^3 _to delve, dig, excavate_, Æ, AO, CP.

âdeliht _filthy_, WW.

âdelsêað m. _sewer, sink_, Æ.

âdêman _to judge, try, deprive of or exclude from by a legal decision_:
_try, afflict_.

âdeorcian _to become dull, obscure, tarnished_, CP: _grow dark_, W.

âderian _to hurt_, GD 219^19.

adesa m., adese f. _'adze,' hatchet_, _BH, W_.

âdexe = âðexe

âd-faru f. ds. -fære _way or path to the funeral pile_, B 3010.

âdfini n. _limit_? _ash-heap of a beacon_? EC 354^5.

âdfýr n. _sacrificial fire_, #Ex# 398.

+âdgian = +êadgian

âdihtan _to compose, write_.

âdihtian _to regulate, arrange, order_, CP.

â-dîlegian, -dîl(i)gian (ý) _to destroy, blot out, annihilate,
devastate_, CP.

âdimmian _to become dim or dull, to darken, obscure_, CP.

âdl fn., âdle f. _disease, infirmity, sickness_, AO, CP.

âdlêg m. _flame of the funeral pile_, #Ph# 222.

±âdlian _to be diseased or ill, languish_, Æ: _cause disease_, DR.

âdlig _sick, diseased_, Æ.

âdliga m. _sick person_

âdliht = âdeliht

âdloma m. _one crippled by fire_, #Gu# 884. [lama?]

âdlsêoc _sick of a contagious disease_, ES 39·322.

âdl-ðracu § f. gs. -ðræce _force of disease_.

âdlung f. _illness_, ÆH 1·122^31.

âdlwêrig _weary from illness_, #Gu# 981.

âdôn (for conj. v. dôn) _to take away, send away_: _cast out, expel,
destroy_: (w. preps. _to, on, from, etc._) _put, place, take, remove,
set free_, AO, CP.

adosa = adesa

âdr¯ædan = ondr¯ædan

âdr¯æfan _to drive away, shut out, expel_, AO, CP. ['_adreve_']

âdr¯ænct = âdrenced pp. of âdrencan.

âdragan^6 _to draw (sword)_, HL 15^356.

âdrêfan = âdr¯æfan

adreminte f. _feverfew_.

âdrencan _to submerge, immerse, drown_, AO. ['_adrench_']

âdrêogan^2 _to act, perform, do, practise_, _Æ_: _bear, suffer, endure_,
_An_; CP: _pass time, live_, Æ. ['_adree_']

âdrêogendlic _bearable_.

âdrêohan = âdrêogan

âdrêopan^2 _to drip, drop_, #An#.

âdrêosan^2 _to fall to pieces, decline, vanish, fail_.

âdrîfan^1 _to drive, drive away, drive out, pursue, follow up_, _LL_; Æ,
AO, CP: _stake out (a ford)_: _chase (metal)_, Æ. ['_adrive_']

âdrîgan = âdrýgan

âdrincan^3 _be drowned, extinguished_, _BH_; AO. ['_adrink_']

âdrûgian, âdrûwian (_Mt, Æ_) _to dry up_. ['_adroughe_']

âdrýgan (î) _to become dry, dry up, wither_, CP: _dry, wipe dry_.

âdrysnan _to extinguish, repress_, NG.

adsa = adesa

adulsêað = adelsêað  [[headword spelled "âdelsêað"]]

âdumbian _to become dumb, keep silence_, _Mk_; Æ. [v. '_dumb_' vb.]

a-dûn, -dûna, -dûne adv. _down, downward_, Æ. [= ofdûne]

adûne(â)stîgan _to descend_, #CPs#.

adûnfeallan _to fall down_, #EPs# 144^14.

adûnweard adv. _downwards_, _ChrL_. ['_a-downward_']

âdûstrigan = andûstrian

âdw¯æscan (ê) _to put out, quench, extinguish, blot out, destroy_, AO:
_suppress_, Æ, CP.

â-dwelian _to wander, stray_.

âdwellan, pret. 3 sg. -dwealde _to seduce, lead astray_: _hinder_, Æ.

âdwêscan = âdw¯æscan

âdwînan^1 _to dwindle or waste away_.

âdýdan _to destroy, mortify, kill_, _Æ_. ['_adeaden_']

âdýfan _to overpower with sound_.

âdylf = âdealf pret. of âdelfan.

âdýlgian, âdýlegian = âdîlegian

âdymman = âdimmian

âdysgian _to make foolish_, W 185^12.

¯æ- accented verbal prefix, = (1) _without_; (2) â-.

¯æ I. f. also ¯æw f. (and m. or n.? in _NG_) _law (divine or human_),
_custom, covenant_, AO, CP; _WG, NG_. butan ¯æ _outlaw_: (esp. in pl.)
_rite, ceremony_: _faith, religion_. unrihte ¯æ _false religion_. Crîstes
¯æ _gospel_: _scriptures, revelation_: _marriage_, Æ: _(lawful) wife_.
For some comps. v. ¯æw-. ['_æ_'] II. = êa I. III. interj. _oh! alas!_

¯æa I. = êa I. II. gp. of ¯æ.

æal- = eal-

¯æalâ interj. = êalâ

¯æar- = êar-

âeargian _to become remiss_, AO 212^20.

¯æb¯ære (ê _LL_) _manifest, notorious, public, open, evident, clear_.
['_eber_']

âebbian _to ebb away, recede_, #Chr#.

æbbung (= ebb-) f. '_ebbing_.' s¯æ æ. _gulf, bay_, _WW_ 154

¯æbebod n. _injunction of the law, command_, #PPs# 118^102.

¯æbêc fp. _books of the law_, WW 439^15.

¯æbêre = ¯æb¯ære

¯æbesn = ¯æfesn  [[headword spelled "æfesn"]]

¯æbilg-, -bili(g)- = ¯æbylg-

¯æbl¯æc- = âbl¯æc-

¯æbl¯æce _lustreless, pale, pallid_.

¯æbod m. _business_, Æ: _statute_.

¯æboda m. _messenger, preacher_, #Gu# 909.

¯æbræce = ¯æwbræce  [[headword spelled "¯æwbr¯æce"]]

¯æbreca = ¯æwbreca

¯æbrecð f. _sacrilege_, #LPs#.

¯æbrucol _sacrilegious_, GPH 402.

æbs f? _fir-tree_, Æ. [_L._ abies]

¯æbylg n. = ¯æbylgð

¯æbylga m. _anger_, #LPs# 77^49.

±¯æbylgan, -byli(g)an _to make angry, offend_, Æ.

¯æbylgnes f. _anger, offence_, Æ.

¯æbylgð, -bylgðu f. _anger_, AO.

¯æbylig- = ¯æbylg-

¯æ-bylð, -bylygð = ¯æbylgð

¯æc I. f. = âc. II. (N) = êac

¯æcambe f. = âcumbe  [[under "âcumba"]]

¯æcan = îecan

æccyrn = æcern

æce = ece

¯æce = êce

æced = eced

æcedwîn n. _wine mingled with myrrh_, MkL 15^23.

¯æcêlan = âcêlan

¯æcelma m. _chilblain_, OEG, WW.

¯æcelmehte (ecil-) _having chilblains_, OEG 1523.

¯æcen I. _a wood of oaks_. II. _oaken_, WW 270^14. III. = êacen pp. of
êacan.

æcer nap. æcras m. _field, sown land, cultivated land_, _Mt_; Æ, AO, CP;
Mdf: _a certain quantity of land, 'acre,'_ _Æ_; v. LL 2·267: _crop_.

æcerceorl m. _countryman, farmer_, NC 268.

æceren = æcern

æcerhege m. _hedge of a field_, KC 3·33^2.

æcerm¯ælum _by acres_, KC 6·98^5.

æcermann m. _farmer_, _WW_. ['_acreman_']

æcern n. _nut, mast of tree_, _Æ_ (i^2): '_acorn_,' WW.

æcernspranca m. _'ilex,' oak sapling_? #ÆGr# 69^15.

æcers¯æd n. _seed enough for an acre_? #Chr# 1124.

æcerteoðung f. _tithe of the produce of the soil_, W 310^24.

æcertýning f. _fencing_, EC 377^9.

æcerweorc n. _field-work_, GPH 391.

æces = æx

æcest, æceð pres. 2 and 3 sg. of acan.

¯æcilma = ¯æcelma

æcirn = æcern

¯æcl¯æca = âgl¯æca

¯æclêaw = ¯æglêaw

¯æcnôsle _degenerate, not noble_, WW.

+¯æcnôsliende _degenerating_, WW 218^12.

¯æcræft ¶ m. _knowledge of law or ordinances, religion_.

¯æcræftig _learned in the law_; as sb. = _lawyer, scribe, Pharisee_.

æcras v. æcer.

æcren = æcern

æcs f. _'axe,' pickaxe, hatchet_, CP; _Mt_ (æx).

æcst, æcð pres. 2 and 3 sg. of acan.

¯æcumba = âcumba

æcur = æcer

æcyrf m. _(wood-)choppings_, BH 224^15.

æd (NG) = æt

æd- = ed-

ædderseax (WW) = ¯ædreseax

æddre, ¯ædr = ¯ædre

¯ædre I. f. _artery, vein, pulse, nerve, sinew_, _B_; AO: pl. _veins,
kidneys_: _runlet of water, fountain, spring, stream_. ['_eddre_'] II.
adv. _at once, directly, instantly, quickly_: (¶) _fully, entirely_.
[_OS._ âdro]

¯ædreseax (der) n. _lancet_, WW 410^10.

¯ædreweg m. _artery, vein_.

¯ædrîfan = âdrîfan

ædwist = edwist

æfæst = æfest

¯æfæst = ¯æwfæst

æfdæll -dell (NG) = ofdæle

æfdýne m. _declivity_, #Gl#.

¯æfelle _without skin, peeled_, WW 190^31.

æfen = efen

¯æfen (ê) nm. _'even,' evening, eventide_, _B, MkL, Gu_ (êfn). tô ¯æfenes
_till evening_: _eve_, _RB_.

¯æfencollatio _the 'collatio' read before compline_, NC 268.

¯æfendrêam m. _even-song_, RB.

¯æfengebed n. _evening service_, WW 129^34.

¯æfengereord n. _evening meal, supper_ (often used in pl. of one meal).

¯æfengereordian _to sup, give supper to_, CM 1030.

¯æfengereordung f. _supper_, NC 269.

¯æfengeweorc n. _evening work_, #Lcd# 70b.

¯æfen-giefl, -gifl n. _evening repast, supper_, AO, CP.

¯æfen-glôm, -glôma m., -glômung (omm-, eom-) f. _gloaming, twilight_.

¯æfengrom _fierce at eve_, B 2074.

æfenian = æfnian  [[headword spelled "¯æfnian"]]

¯æfenlâc n. _evening sacrifice, evening prayer_, #PPs# 140^3.

¯æfenl¯æcan _to grow towards evening_, Lk 24^29.

¯æfenlêoht n. _evening light_, B 403.

¯æfenleoð ¶ n. _evening song_.

¯æfenlic _of the evening_; adv. -lîce.

¯æfenlof n. _lauds (service)_, CM 1035.

¯æfenmete m. _supper_.

¯æfenoffrung f. _evening sacrifice_, NC 269.

¯æfenr¯æding f. _reading (during the evening meal at a monastery),
'collatio,'_ CM.

¯æfenrepsung f. _nightfall_, Æ.

¯æfen-rest, -ræst ¶ f. _evening rest_.

¯æfensang m. '_evensong_,' _Æ, RB_.

¯æfensceop m. _evening singer, bard_, #Rd# 9^5. [scop]

¯æfenscîma m. _evening splendour_, #Gen# 2448.

¯æfenspr¯æc f. _evening talk_, B 759.

¯æfensteorra m. _the evening star, Hesperus_, _Bo_; Æ. ['_evenstar_']

¯æfen-tîd f., -tima m. _eventide_, Æ.

¯æfenðênung f. _evening service_: _evening repast, supper_.

¯æfenðêowdôm m. _evening service or office_, WW 129^34.

¯æfenung = ¯æfnung

¯æfer = ¯æfre

æferðe f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd#.

æfes- = efes-

æfesa ? m., æfese (m.) f. = æfesn

æfesn, æfesen f. _relish, dainty, special pasturage, pannage_; _the
charge for special pasturage_, LL.

æfesne ?= æpsen?

æfest mf. _envy, hatred, malice, spite_, CP; _El, Ps_: _zeal, rivalry_.
['_evest_']

¯æfest == ¯æwfæst

æfestful _full of envy_.

±æfestian -igian _to be or become envious_.

æfestig _envious_: _zealous_.

æfestlîce = ofostlîce  [[under "ofost"]]

æfgælð f. _superstition_, OEG.

æfgerefa (-groefa) '_exactor_,' LkL 12^58.

æfgrynde n. _abyss_, #PPs# 35^6.

æfhynde = ofhende

æfian (-an?) _to be in a miserable condition_, #Cr# 1357 (or æfnan?
Gollancz).

æfisc (EC 291) = efesc [[under "efes"]]

æflâst m. _a wandering from the way_? #Ex# 473.

±æfnan (e) _to carry out, do, perform, fulfil_: _cause_: _endure,
suffer_: (+) _hold, sustain_. [_ON._ efna]

æfne = efne

±¯æfnian _to grow towards evening_, Æ.

¯æfnung f. _'evening,' sunset_, _Æ_.

¯æfre adv. _'ever,' at any time_, _Sat, Mt_: _always, constantly,
perpetually_, _Cr, RB_; Æ, CP: _henceforth_: ne ¯æ.; ¯æ. ne (= n¯æfre)
_never_; ¯æ. tô aldre _for ever_. ¯æ. ¯ælc, _W, Chr_. ¯æ. ¯ænig _any at
all_, _KC_.

æfreda m. _what is taken or separated from_, OEG (Napier). [æf; *hreda
(hreddan)]: _tow, oakum_ (BT).

¯æfremmende _pious, religious_, #Jul# 648.

æfse I. = efes. II. = æbs

æfsecgan _to confute_, ES 42^163.

æfst == æfest

æfsweorc n. _pasturage_, WW 410^12 (= *æfesweorc).

æft = eft

æftan adv. _from behind, behind, in the rear_, _Ma_. ['_aft_']

æftanweard adj. _behind, in the rear, following_, #Rd# 63^5.

æftemest adj. _last, hindmost_, Æ, AO.

æfter I. prep. (w. d., i. and--chiefly N.--a.) (local and temporal)
_after, along, behind, through, throughout, during_: (causal)
_following, in consequence of, according to, for the purpose of_:
(object) _after, about, in pursuit of, for_. II. adv. _after, then,
afterwards, thereafter_: _thereupon, later, back_ (= _in return_). æ.
ðon, ðæm, ðisum; æ. ðæm (ðon, ðan) ðe; _afterwards, thereafter_.

æftera = æfterra

æfter¯æ f. _the book Deuteronomy_, Æ.

æfterboren adj. _'afterborn,' posthumous_, _ÆGr_.

æftercweðan^5 _to speak after, repeat_. æftercweðendra lof _praise from
posterity_: _to renounce, abjure_, #Chr# 1094.

æftercyning m. _later king_, BH 140^24 B.

æfterealu n. _small beer_, WW 129^4.

æfterfilian = æfterfylgan  [[under "æfterfolgan"]]

æfterfiligend = æfterfylgend

æfterfolgere m. _follower_, AO 142^23.

æfter-folgian, -fylgan (AO) _to follow after, succeed, pursue_.

æfterfylgednes f. _sequel_, ÆL 23b^365.

æfterfylgend m. _follower, successor_, AO, -lîce _in succession_.

æfterfylgendnes f. _succession_, SHy 11.

æfterfylgung (eft-) f. _pursuit_.

æfterfylig- = æfterfylg-

æfter-genga, -gengea m. _follower, successor_: _descendant_, Æ.

æftergengel m. _successor_, KC.

æftergengnes f. _succession_, Æ: _posterity_: _inferiority_.

æftergyld n. _further payment_, LL.

æfterh¯æðe f? _autumn drought_, AO 102^7.

æfterhyrigan _to imitate_, BH.

æfterlêan n. _reward, recompense, restitution, retribution_, #Gen# 76.

æfterlic _second_, WW 505^19.

æfterra (comp.) _second, following, next, latter, lower_, CP.

æfter-râp (Æ) -ræpe m. _crupper_.

æfterrîdan^1 _to ride after_.

æfterrôwan^7 _to row after_, ES 41^325.

æfterryne m. '_occursus_,' #CPs# 18^7.

æftersang m. _(after-song), _matins_, CM 449.

æftersingallic (= -sanglic) _of matins_, CM 476.

æftersingend m. _succentor_, WW 129^23.

æftersona _soon, afterwards, again_, NG.

æfterspræc f. _after-claim_, LL 398^7.

æftersprecan^5 _to claim_, LL 226[9,4].

æfterspyrian _to track out, search, inquire into, examine_, CP.

æfterweard adj. _after, following, further, behind, in the rear,
later_, Æ.

æfterweardnes f. _posterity_, WW 464^18.

æfterwriten _written afterwards_, #Lcd# 69b.

æfterwyrcan _to cause, effect_.

æfter-yld, -yldo f. ¶_advanced age, old age_: _after age, later time_,
BH. [ield(o)]

æfteweard = æfterweard

æftewearde adv. _behind_.

æftra = æfterra

æftresta superl. _last_.

æftum adv. _after_, MtR 24^21.

æftyr = æfter

æfðanc, æfðanca (o, u) m. _insult, offence_: _grudge, displeasure,
anger_.

æf-weard (CP) -ward _absent_.

æfweardnes f. _absence_, #Bo#, GD.

æfwela f. _decrease of wealth_, #Lcd# 3·170^13.

æfwendla (WW 223^1) = æfwyrdla

æf-werdelsa, -wyrdelsa m. _injury, damage, loss_.

æfwyrdla, m. _injury, damage, loss_: _fine for injury or loss_.

æfwyrð(u) ? f. _degradation, disgrace_, RB.

¯æfyllende _fulfilling the law, pious_, #Cr# 704.

¯æfyn = ¯æfen

¯æfyrmða fp. _sweepings, rubbish_. [feormian]

¯æg n. (nap. ¯ægru) '_egg_,' _Lcd, Lk, OET, Met_.

¯æg = îeg

¯ægan = âgan

æge = ege

¯ægen = âgen

¯ægera (K) dp. of ¯æg.

¯ægerfelma f. _egg-skin_, #Lcd# 20b.

¯ægergelu n. _yolk of egg_, #Gl#. [¯æg, geolu]

¯ægflota m. _seafarer, sailor_, #An# 258. [îeg]

¯æggemang n. _egg-mixture_, WW.

¯æg-hwâ mf., -hwæt, n. pron. _each one, every one, everything, who or
whatever_. ¯æghw¯æt neut. _anything_. [¯æg = âgi]

¯æghw¯ær _everywhere, in every direction_, _Mk_; Æ: _in every case, in
every respect_: _anywhere_. ['_aywhere_']

¯æghwæs (gs. of ¯æghwâ) _altogether, in every way, entirely, wholly,
throughout, in general_.

¯æghwæt v. ¯æghwâ.

¯æghwæðer (¯ægðer, âðer). I. pron. _each or every one (of two or more)_,
_'either,' both_, _AO, Mt_ (gð). II. conj. ¯æghwæðer (ge)...ge;
¯ægðer...and _both...and_; _as well...as_.

¯æg-hwanan, -hwanon(e), -hwannon, -hwanum, _from all parts, everywhere,
on every side, in every way_.

¯æg-hwâr, -hwêr = ¯æghw¯ær

¯æghwelc = ¯æghwilc

¯æghweðer = ¯æghwæðer

¯æghwider _on every side, in all directions_: _in any direction,
anywhere_.

¯æghwilc adj. _each, every, whosoever, whatsoever, all, every one_, _Bo,
Met_. ¯æ. ânra _each_. ¯æ. ôðer _each other_, _Ma_. ¯æghwilces _in every
way_. [v. '_each_']

¯æg-hwonan, -hwonon (CP), -hwonene = ¯æghwanan

¯æghwyder = ¯æghwider

¯æghwylc = ¯æghwilc

¯ægift f. (m? n?) _restitution, repayment_.

¯ægilde adv. _receiving no 'wergild' as compensation_, LL.

¯ægilt = ¯ægylt

¯ægl¯æc == âgl¯æc

¯æglêaw _learned in the law_.

¯æglêca = âgl¯æca

¯æglîm m. _white of egg_. [lîm]

¯ægmang (WW 4^89) = ¯æggemang

¯ægmore f. _root of the eye, socket_? #Lcd# 3·98^5. [êage]

ægnan sb. pl. _awns, sweepings, chaff_, #Gl#. [v. egenu]

¯ægnes = âgnes, v. âgen.

¯ægnian = âgnian

¯ægru v. ¯æg.

ægsa = egsa  [[under "egesa"]]

¯ægscill (y) f. _eggshell_, #Lcd#.

¯ægðer = ¯æghwæðer

¯ægweard f. _watch on the shore_, B 241. [îeg]

¯ægwern = ¯æghw¯ær

¯ægwyrt f. _dandelion_, #Lcd# 158b.

¯ægylde = ¯ægilde

¯ægylt m. _sin, offence_. [¯æw, gylt]

¯ægype _without skill or cunning_ (BT), #PPs# 106^10.

æhher (MkR 4^28) = êar

¯æhîw n. _pallor_, OEG 4897.

¯æhîwe _pallid_: _deformed_.

¯æhîwnes f. _pallor_, #Lcd# 1·294^3.

¯æhlýp m. _breach of the peace, assault_, LL. [cp. æthlýp]

æht == eaht

¯æht I. f. (rare in sg.) _possessions, goods, lands, wealth, cattle_,
_Mk_; AO: _ownership, control_. [âgan: '_aught_' sb.] II. = ôht

âêhtan _to persecute_, LkL 21^12.

¯æhtboren _born in bondage_, RB 11^20.

¯æhte = âhte pret. sg. of âgan.

¯æhteland n. _territory_, BH 358^14.

æhtemann m. _tiller of the soil, serf, farmer_, Æ.

¯æhteswân m. _swineherd who was a chattel on an estate_, LL 449^7.

¯æhtgesteald n. _possession_, #Jul# 115.

¯æhtgestrêon n. _possessions_, #Ph# 506.

¯ætgeweald ¶ mn. _power, control_.

æhtian = eahtian

+æhtle f. _esteem_, B 369.

æhtowe (LkR 2^21) = eahta

¯æhtspêd f. _wealth, riches_, #LPs# 103^24.

¯æhtspêdig _rich_.

¯æhtwela ¶ m. _wealth, riches_.

¯æhtwelig _wealthy, rich_, #Jul# 18.

¯æhwænne = âhwænne

¯æhw¯ær, -hwâr = âhw¯ær

  [[Printed on one line:
  ¯æhwænne, ¯æhw¯ær, -hwâr = âhwænne, âhwær]]

¯æhwyrfan = âhwierfan

æhx = æcs

æig = æg  [[error for "¯æg"?]]

æl- prefix = I. eal(l)-. II. el(e)-.

æl m. _piercer, 'awl,'_ _Æ_.

¯æl m. '_eel_,' _WW_; Mdf.

¯ælâ = êalâ

¯æl¯ædend m. _legislator_, #SPs# 9^21.

¯æl¯ærende m. _teacher of the law, instructor in religion_, #El# 506.

¯æl¯æte I. n. _desert place_. II. _desert, empty_, W 47^21. III. f.
_divorced woman_.

¯æl¯æten I. = âl¯æten pp. of âl¯ætan. II. = ¯æl¯æte II.

¯ælagol _lawgiving_, GPH 397^363.

¯ælan _to kindle, light, set on fire, burn_, Æ, CP.

¯ælârêow (-lârua) m. _teacher of the law_, _Pharisee_, NG.

ælað = ealað

ælbeorht = eallbeorht

ælbitu (#Gl#) = ilfetu

¯ælc [êlc, ylc (#VPs#); v. '_each_'] I. (pron. subst.) _any, all, every,
each (one)_, Æ, AO, CP. ¯ælc...ôðrum _the one...the other_. II. (adj.
pron.) _each_, _Lcd_: _any_, _CP_.

¯ælceald ¶ _altogether cold, very cold_.

ælcor = elcor

ælcra = elcra  [[under "elcora"]]

ælcræftig ¶ _almighty, all-powerful_.

¯ælcuht (AO) ælcwuht n. _everything_.

æld = æled  [[headword spelled "¯æled"]]

æld- = ield-

ældewuta (NG) = ealdwita

¯ælecung = ôleccung

¯æled ¶ m. gs. ¯ældes _fire, firebrand_. ¯æ. weccan _to kindle a fire_,
#Whale# 21. [_ON._ eldr]

¯æledfýr n. _flame of fire_, #Ph# 366?

¯æledlêoma m. _fire-brand_, B 3125.

ælegr¯ædig _greedy_, ÆL 18^213. [eall-]

ælegrêne (#RPs# 127^3) = eallgrêne

ælelendisc = elelendisc

ælemidde f. _exact middle_, Æ.

¯ælenge I. _lengthy, tedious, vexatious_, _CP_. ['_elenge_'] II.
_weariness_.

¯ælengnes f. _tediousness_, #Sc#, WW.

ælepe ? _'origanum,' wild marjoram_, WW 299^19. [ælene? BT]

¯ælepûte f. _'eel-pout,' burbot_, _WW_.

æleð pres. 3 sg. of alan.

¯æleð, ¯ælð = ¯æled

ælewealdend = eallwealdend

ælf mf. (pl. ielfe, ylfe) _'elf,' sprite, fairy, goblin, incubus_, _B,
Lcd_.

ælfâdl f. _nightmare_, #Lcd# 123b.

ælfæle = ealfelo

æl-faru, -fær f. _whole army, host_, #Ex# 66.

ælfcynn n. _elfin race_, #Lcd# 123a.

ælfer = ælfaru

¯æl-fisc, -fix m. _eel_, TC 242^11.

ælfitu = ylfetu  [[under "ylfet" (defined under "ilfetu")]]

æl-fremed, -fremd, (el-) _strange, foreign_, Æ: (+) _estranged_, #LPs#
57^4: (w. fram) _free, separated from_, Æ.

ælfremeda (el-) m. _stranger, foreigner_.

ælfremedung f. '_alienatio_,' RHy 5^14.

ælf-scîene (î^2ý^2) ¶ _bright as an elf or fairy, beautiful, radiant_.

ælfsiden f. _elvish influence, nightmare_, #Lcd# 120b.

ælfsogoða m. _hiccough (thought to have been caused by elves)_, #Lcd#
124b.

ælfðêodlîce = elðêodiglîce

ælfðone f. _nightshade_, #Lcd# 123b.

ælfylce (= el-) ¶ n. I. _strange land_. II. _foreign band, enemy_.

¯ælhyd f. _eel receptacle_? _eel-skin_? (BT) LL 455^17.

¯ælic _(of the law), legal, lawful_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

ælifn f. _sustenance_, #Gl#? (v. ES 42·166)

¯æling f. _burning_, Æ: _ardour_.

¯æling- = ¯æleng-

æll- = æl-, eal(l)-, el(l)-

ælmes = ælmesse

ælmesæcer m. _ground of which the yield was given as alms,
first-fruits_, A 11·3^69.

ælmesbæð n. _gratuitous bath_, W 171^2.

ælmesdæd f. _almsdeed_, Æ.

ælmesdônde _giving alms_, NC 269.

ælmesfeoh n. _alms_: _Peter's pence, Romescot_, _LL_ ['_almsfee_']

ælmesfull _charitable_.

ælmesgedâl n. _distribution of alms_.

ælmesgeorn _charitable_, Æ.

ælmesgifa (y^3) m. _giver of alms_, W 72^4.

ælmesgifu f. _alms, charity_, W 159^20.

ælmeshlâf m. _dole of bread_, TC 474^23.

ælmeslâc _giving of alms_, NC 269.

ælmeslêoht n. _a light in church provided at the expense of a pious
layman_.

ælmeslic _charitable_: _depending on alms, poor_, -lîce, adv.
_charitably_, OET. (Ct.)

ælmeslond m. _land granted in frankalmoigne_. [almes-]

ælmesmann m. _'almsman,' bedesman, beggar_, _Lcd_; Æ.

ælmespening m. _alms-penny_.

ælmesriht n. _right of receiving alms_.

ælmesse f. _'alms,' almsgiving_, _Da, Mt_; Æ, CP. [_L._ eleêmosyna]

ælmessylen (e^3) f. _almsgiving_.

ælmesweorc n. _almsdeed_, #Bl# 25^17.

ælmidde = ælemidde

ælmiehtig = ælmihtig

ælmihtig (ea^2, e^2) adj. '_almighty_,' _B, Ps, TC_; AO, CP: m. _the
Almighty_.

ælmihtignes f. _omnipotence_, AS 59^13.

ælmyrca m. _one entirely black, Ethiopian_, #An# 432.

ælmysse = ælmesse

¯ælnet n. _eel net_, BH.

¯ælpig = ânlîpig  [[under "ânlîpe"]]

ælren adj. _of an alder tree_, _KC_ 7·316. ['_aldern_']

ælreord = elreord

ælsyndrig _separately_, LkR 2^3.

ælt¯æwe (êo, ô) _complete, entire, perfect, healthy, sound, true_, Æ, AO,
CP: _noted_, _Æ_. [_Goth._ têwa]. -lîce adv.

ælðêod (ælðied-) == elðêod

æl-walda, -wealda = ealwealda  [[under "eallwealda"]]

ælwiht ¶ m. _strange creature, monster_ [= *elwiht]; (in pl.) =
eallwihta

æmbern = embren

¯æmelle _insipid_, WW 429^30.

¯æmelnes f. _slackness, sloth_, Æ: _weariness, disgust_, WW.

¯æmen, ¯æmenne (AO) _uninhabited, desolate, desert_.

¯æmenne _solitude_, AS 4^11 (v. Wfg 3).

¯æmerge f. _embers, ashes, dust_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_ember_']

¯æmet- = ¯æmett-

¯æmetbed n. _ant-hill_, #Lcd# 121b.

¯æmethwîl f. _leisure_, Æ.

¯æmethyll m. _ant-hill_, CP 191^25.

¯æmetian = ¯æmtian

¯æmetta m. _leisure, rest_, CP. [môt]

¯æmette f. _'emmet,' ant_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ.

¯æmettig (CP), -m(e)tig (Æ) _'empty,' vacant_, _Bl, Æ_: _unoccupied,
without employment_, _Æ_: _unmarried_, _CP_.

¯æmettigian = ¯æmtian

¯æminde n. _forgetfulness_, #Lcd# 1·384´.

¯æmôd _dismayed, disheartened_, Æ, AO.

¯æmt- = ¯æmett-

±¯æmtian _to 'empty,'_ _Æ_: _to be at leisure, have time for_, Æ, CP.

¯æmtignes f. _emptiness_, GD 35^17.

¯æmûða m. '_cæcum intestinum_,' WW 160^11.

¯æmynde = ¯æminde

¯æmyrce _excellent_, WW 393^38.

¯æmyrie = ¯æmerge

¯æmytte = ¯æmette

¯æn == ân

+æn- = +en-

ænbrece = unbrece

ænd- = end-

¯æne (âne) _once, at some time_, _Æ, B_: _at any time_: _at once_.
['ene']

æned = ened

¯ænes adv. _once_.

¯ænetre = ânwintre

¯ænett, ¯ænetnes = ânet  [[under "ânett"]]

¯ænga = ânga

¯ængancundes _in a unique way_? (BT), #Lcd# 162b.

ænge = enge

ængel = engel

Ænglisc = Englisc

ænid = ened

¯ænig adj. pron. and sb. _'any,' any one_, _Mk, Jn_. ¯ænige ðinga
_somehow, anyhow_. [ân]

¯ænigge = ânêage

¯ænigmon _any one, some one_, NG.

¯æniht = âwuht

¯æninga = ânunga

ænl¯ænan = onl¯ænan

¯ænlefan = endlufon  [[under "endleofan"]]

¯ænlêp- = ânlêp-

¯ænlic _one_, _'only,' singular, solitary_, _Ps_; Lk: _unique, glorious,
noble, splendid, excellent_, _Bo_; Æ, AO. adv. -lîce.

¯ænlîpig (Æ) = ânlîpig  [[under "ânlîpe"]]

¯ænne (AO, CP) v. ân.

¯ænote _useless_, LL 254[3,34].

¯ænr¯ædnis = ânr¯ædnes

¯ænyge = ânêage

¯ænytte = ¯ænette  [[form of "¯ænett"?]]

æpl == æppel

æpled = æppled

æppel m. (nap. æpplas, rarely ap(p)la, æppla) _any kind of fruit, fruit
in general_: '_apple_,' _CP, Gen_: _apple of the eye, ball, anything
round_, _Bo, CP, Sol_.

æppelb¯ære ¶ _fruit-bearing_: _apple-bearing_.

æppelbearu m. _orchard_, #PPs# 78^2.

æppelberende _apple-bearing_, DR 98^16.

æppelcynn n. _kind of apple_, #Lcd# 67a.

æppelcyrnel n. _apple pip_, WW 440^23.

æppelfæt n. _apple-vessel_, ZDA 31·15^401.

æppelfealu _apple-yellow, bay_, B 2165.

æppelhûs n. _fruit storehouse_, WW.

æppelscealu f. _apple-core_, WW 371^1.

æppelscrêad n. (only in pl.) _apple-parings_, WW 118^1.

æppeltrêow n. '_apple-tree_,' _WW_.

æppeltûn m. _apple or fruit garden, orchard_, Æ, CP.

æppelðorn m. _crab-apple tree_, BC 3·93´.

æppelwîn n. _cider_, WW 430^9.

æppled ¶ _shaped like an apple, round, embossed_, _El_. ['_appled_']

æppul- = apul-

æps == æsp, æbs

æpsen _shameless_, OEG 7^301.

æpsenes f. _disgrace_.

¯ær I. adv. comp. ¯æror; sup. ¯ærost, ¯ær(e)st _'ere,' before that,
soon, formerly, beforehand, previously, already, lately, till_; (comp.)
_sooner, earlier_; (sup.) _just now, first of all_, _OET, Jn, El_:
_early, prematurely_, _Gu, Mk_. on ¯ær; ¯ær ðissum _previously,
formerly, beforehand_, _CP_. tô ¯ær _too soon_. ¯ær oððe æfter _sooner
or later_. hwonne ¯ær _how soon? when?_ hwêne ¯ær _just before_. on
ealne ¯ærne mergen _very early in the morning_. ne ¯ær ne siððan
_neither sooner nor later_. ¯ær and sið _at all times_. II. conj.
_'ere,' before that, until_, Æ, AO, CP. ¯ær ðam(ðe) _before_, _B_.
III. prep. (w. d.) _before_. IV. adj. only in comp. and sup. (¯ærra,
¯ærest) q.v. V. f. = âr f. VI. n. = âr n.

¯ær- = I. _early, former_. II. intensitive prefix.

¯æra I. m. _scraper, strigil_, #Gl#. II. = ¯ærra

¯ær¯æt m. _excessive_ (or _too early_?) _eating_.

ærbe- = yrfe-, ierfe-

¯ærbeðoht _premeditated_.

¯ærboren _earlier born, first-born_ (or ? two words), #Gen# 973.

ærc = earc

ærce == arce

¯ærcwide m. _prophecy_? #Mod# 4.

¯ærd¯æd f. _former deed_.

¯ærdæg m. (nap. ¯ærdagas) _early day, early morn, dawn_: in pl. _former
days, past times_, AO.

¯ærdêað m. _premature death_, #Ex# 539.

ærdian = eardian

ærdon = ærndon? from ærnan (Grein), #Ma# 191.

ærdung = eardung

¯ære I. = ýre. II. in comp. = _-oared_.

¯ærêafe (= ¯æ^2) _detected_, TC 230^16.

¯æreldo '_anteritus_,' WW 347^12.

¯æren _made of brass, brazen_, Æ, AO, CP: _tinkling_? [âr; cp. _Ger._
ehern]

¯ærendbôc f. _message, letter_.

¯ærenddraca (AO, CP) = ¯ærendraca

¯ærende n. _'errand,' message_, _BH, Gu_; AO: _mission_, _An, Chr_:
_answer, news, tidings_, Æ.

¯ærendfæst _commissioned with an errand_, ÆL 26^221.

¯ærendgâst m. _angel_, #Gen# 2296.

¯ærendgewrit n. _written message, letter_, Æ, CP.

±¯ærendian _to go on an errand, carry a message, send word to_, CP:
_intercede_, _BH_; Æ: (+)_speed, succeed_, W 238^9. ['_ernde_']

¯ærendraca m. _messenger, apostle, ambassador, angel_, Æ, AO:
_representative, substitute, proxy_, BH 276^19.

¯ærendscip n. _skiff, small boat_.

¯ærendsecg m. _messenger_, #Gen# 658.

¯ærendspr¯æc f. _message_, #Rd# 61^15.

¯ærendung f. _errand_: _errand-going_, _RB_. ['_ernding_']

¯ærend-wraca (AO) -wreca, (CP) = ¯ærendraca

¯ærendwrit = ¯ærendgewrit

¯ærenscip = ¯ærendscip

¯ærer = ¯æror

¯ærest I. adv. and superl. adj. _first, at first, before all_, Æ, CP. ðâ,
ðonne, siððan ¯æ. _as soon as_. ¯æ. ðinga _first of all_. II. = ¯ærist

¯ærfæder m. _forefather_, B 2622.

¯ærfæst == ârfæst

ærfe == ierfe, yrfe

¯ærgedôn _done before_, CP.

¯ærgefremed _before committed_.

¯ærgelêred _previously instructed_, MtL 14^8.

¯ærgenemned, -gesæd = ¯ærnemned

¯ærgestrêon ¶ n. _ancient treasure_.

¯ærgeweorc ¶ n. _ancient work, work of olden times_.

¯ærgewinn n. _former strife or trouble, old warfare_, #Cross# 19.

¯ærgewyrht ¶ n. _former work, deed of old_.

¯ærglæd _very bright_, #Ex# 293.

¯ærgôd ¶ _good from old times_?, _very good_.

¯ærhwîlum ¶ _erewhile, formerly_.

ærian = erian

ærig (OET) = earh

¯æriht ¶ n. _code of law or faith_.

¯æring f. _day-break, early morning_ (A).

¯ærisc = êarisc

¯ærist I. (ê) mfn. _rising_, _VPs_: _resurrection, awakening_, _Jn_; CP.
['_arist_'] II. = ¯ærest

¯ærlêof? _very dear_, OEG 56^296.

¯ærlêst = ârlêast

¯ærlic(â) adj.; -lîce adv. '_early_,' _Jn_.

¯ærlyft f. _early morning air_, WW 415^13.

ærm = earm

¯ærmorgen (a^1, a^2, e^2) m. _early morning, dawn, day-break_.

¯ærmorgenlic _of early morning_, DR.

ærn n. _dwelling, habitation, house, building, closet_.

¯ærn = ¯æren

ærnan _to 'run,' ride, gallop_, _BH_: (+) _to ride, run to, reach, gain
by running or riding_, _AO_: = +iernan

ærndian = ærendian  [[headword spelled "¯ærendian"]]

¯ærne-mergen, -merigen (Æ) = ¯ærmorgen

¯ærnemergenlic _matutinal_, CM 277.

¯ærnemned _aforementioned_.

ærneweg m. _road for riding on, race-course_. [iernan]

ærnian = earnian

ærning f. _'running,' riding, racing_, _Bo, GD_: _flow of blood_, _MtL_
9^20. (iorn-)

ærnð = ernð

ærnðegen (?) m. _house-officer_, #Gl#.

ærnung = earnung

¯æron = ¯ærran  [[form of "¯ærra"]]

¯æror I. adv. _earlier, before, beforehand, formerly_, Æ, AO: _rather_.
II. prep. (w. d.) _before_.

¯ærost = ¯ærest

¯ærra m. ¯ærre fn. adj. _earlier, former_, _Bo, El_; CP. on ¯ærran dæg
_the day before yesterday_. ['_ere_,' '_erer_']

¯ærror = ¯æror

ærs = ears

¯ærsceaft § f. _old work, ancient building_.

ærschen, ærshen = erschen

¯ærst = ¯ærest

¯ærstæf = ârstæf

¯ær-ðam, -ðon, -ðamðe v. ¯ær.

ærð- = yrð-

¯ærwacol _early awake_, Æ.

+ærwe _depraved, wicked_, #EPs# 100^4.

¯ærwela m. _ancient wealth_, B 2747.

¯ærworuld f. _ancient world_, #Cr# 937.

¯ærynd = ¯ærend  [[headword spelled "¯ærende"]]

¯æryr = ¯æror

¯æryst I. = ¯ærist. II. = ¯ærest

¯æs n. _food, meat, carrion_: _bait_. [_OHG._ âs]

æsc I. m. nap. ascas _'ash'-tree_, _Gl, KC_; Mdf: _name of the rune for
=æ=_: (¶) _spear, lance_: _ship_, Æ. II. = æcs

¯æscære _unshorn, untrimmed_. [scieran]

¯æscan _to demand (legally)_, LL 177´.

¯æscapo (WW 273^36) = ¯æsceapa

æscberend ¶ m., -bora ¶ m. _spear-bearer, soldier_.

æscberende _spear-bearing_, #Gen# 2041.

æsce = asce

¯æsce f. _asking, inquiry, search_, _LL_: _claim (to insurance money for
theft of cattle)_, LL 175^2. ['_ask_' sb.]

¯æsceap (ê^1) n. _remnant, patch_.

æsceda fpl. _refuse_? WW 148^33.

æscegeswâp n. _cinders, ashes_, TC 318^33.

æscen I. fm. _vessel of ash-wood, bucket, pail, bottle, cup_. II. adj.
_made of ash-wood, ashen_, #Lcd#.

æscfealu _ashy-hued_, WW 204^23.

æscgræg _ashy gray_, WW 204^24.

æschere m. _naval force_, #Ma# 69.

æscholt ¶ n. _spear of ash-wood, spear-shaft, lance_ (v. also Mdf).

¯æscian = âcsian  [[under "âscian"]]

æscmann m. _ship-man, sailor, pirate_. [æsc]

æscplega m. _play of spears, battle_, #Jud# 217.

æscrind f. _bark of the ash-tree_, #Lcd#.

æscrôf ¶ _brave in battle_.

æscstede m. _place of battle_, #Mod# 17; Mdf.

æscstederôd f. _cross marking a battlefield_? Ct (BT).

æsctîr m. _glory in war_, #Gen# 2069.

æscðracu f. _battle_, #Gen# 2153.

æsc-ðrote, -ðrotu f. _a plant, ferula_? _vervain_?

¯æsmæl _smallness of the eye_, #Lcd#.

¯æsmogu np. _slough (of snake)_ #Lcd# 88a. [â-smûgan]

æscwert = æscwyrt

æscwiga ¶ m. _(spear-) warrior_.

æscwlanc ¶ _brave_.

æscwyrt f. _verbena, vervain_.

¯æscyldian '_delinquere_,' #PPs#.

¯æsellend (y^2) m. _lawgiver_.

æsil = hæsel

æslitend m. _law-breaker_, #LPs#.

æsne- = esne-

æsp = æspe I.

æspe I. f. _aspen-tree, white poplar_, #Gl#; Mdf. ['_asp_^1'] II. = æbs

æspen adj. _aspen_.

¯æspreng, ¯æspring(e) = ¯æspryng

æsprind (ps) f. _aspen, bark_, _Lcd_. ['_asp_']

¯æspringnes = âsprungenes  [[headword spelled "âsprungennes"]]

¯æspryng nf. _spring, fountain_, CP. [êa]: _departure_, #Creat# 77.

¯æst I. = ¯ærest. II. = êst

¯æst¯ænan = âst¯ænan

¯æstan = êastan

æstel m. _book-marker_, CP 9. [_L._ hastula]

æsul = esol

¯æsw¯æpe sbpl. _sweepings, rubbish_.

¯æswic m. _offence, stumbling-block, infamy, seduction, deceit_.

¯æswica, ¯æswicend m. _offender, deceiver, hypocrite, traitor_.

¯æswice m. _violation of God's laws_ (or? _adultery_), W 164^3.

±¯æswician _to offend, deceive_, Æ: _apostatize_, WW 342^12: _desert_, Æ.

¯æswicnes f. _stumbling-block_, #LPs# 105^36.

¯æswicung f. _offence, stumbling-block_, Æ: _deceit_, Æ: _sedition_.

¯æswind _idle, slothful_, WW 422^13. [swîð]

¯æsyllend = ¯æsellend

æt I. prep. (w. d. and, more rarely, a.) (local) _'at,' near, by, in,
on, upon, with, before, next to, as far as, up to, into, toward_:
(temporal) _at, at the time of, near, in, on, to, until_: (causal) _at,
to, through_: (source) _from_: (instrumental) _by_. æt fêawum wordum _in
few words_, BH: _in respect to, as to_. II. adv. _at, to, near_. æt
nehstan, æt siðestan _finally_. æt- in composition = _at, to, from_.

¯æt I. mfn. _eatables, food, meat, flesh_, _Gu_; Æ, AO. ¯æt and w¯æt
_food and drink_, Æ: _the act of feeding, eating_, _PPs_; MkL (ê).
['_eat_' sb.] II. pret. 3 sg. of etan.

¯æt- = âte-

-¯æta v. self-¯æta.

æt¯æwian = ætîewan

âetan^5 _to eat, devour_, AS 17^16; 37^5.

ætbêon anv. _to be present_.

ætberan^4 _to carry to, bring, produce, show_, _Da_: _carry off_, _B_.
['_atbear_']

ætberstan^3 _to break out, or away, escape from_, _Æ_. ['_atburst_']

ætbrêdan = ætbregdan

ætbrêdendlic _ablative_, #ÆGr# 23^7.

æt-bregdan, -brêdan^3 _to take away, carry off, deprive of, snatch away,
draw off, withdraw_, _Mt_; Æ: _release, rescue, enlarge_: _prevent_, ÆL
31^126. ['_atbraid_']

ætclifian _to adhere_, #BJPs# 101^6.

ætclîðan _to adhere_, OET 181.

ætdêman _to refuse, give judgment against_, EC 202.

ætdôn anv. _to take away, deprive_.

¯æte = âte

ætêaca (eth-) m. '_appendix_,' OEG 53^18.

ætêacnes = ætýcnes

ætealdod _too old_, Æ (2^159).

ætêaw- = ætîew-, ætýw-

ætêcan = ætýcan

ætegâr = ætgâr  [[under "ætg¯ære"]]

æteglan _to harm_, #PPs# 88^19.

ætêode pret. 3 sg. of *ætgân _he came_.

¯æteorian = âteorian  [[headword spelled "âtêorian"]]

ætêow- = ætîew-, ætýw-

ætercyn = atorcyn  [[headword spelled "âtorcyn"]]

¯ætere (ê^1) m. _'eater,' glutton_, _Prov_; NG.

¯ætern I. (NG) _viper_. II. = ¯ætren

ætêw- = ætîew-, ætýw-

ætfæstan (= oð-) _to inflict on, afflict with_: _fasten to, drive into,
impart to_, CP 115^19: _commit, entrust_: _marry to_.

ætfæstnian _to fasten_? _entrust_? AS 21^19.

ætfaran^6 _to escape_, #Shr# 14^23.

ætfeallan^7 _to fall, fall out_: _fall away, fail, be reduced_, _LL_; Æ:
_happen_. ['_atfall_']

ætfele m. _adhesion_, #PPs# 72^23.

ætfeng m. _attaching, distraint_ v. LL 2·279.

ætfeohtan^2 ¶ _to grope about_.

ætfêolan^3 _to stick to_: _adhere, apply oneself to, continue in_, CP.

ætfeorrian _to take from_, #Sc# 160^7.

ætferian _to carry away, bear off_.

ætfîlan = ætfêolan

ætflêon^2 _to flee away, escape by flight_, _Æ_. ['_atflee_']

ætflôwan^7 _to flow together, accumulate_, #SPs# 61^10.

ætfôn^7 _to seize upon, lay claim to_, _LL_. ['_atfong_']

ætforan I. prep. w. d. _before, in the presence of, in front of, close
by_, _Jn_; Æ. ['_atfore_']. II. adv. _beforehand_ (time).

ætfyligan, -fylgan _to adhere, cling to_.

æt-gædere (AO), -gæddre (CP), -gædre, -gæderum adv. _together, united,
at the same time_. [gadrian]

æt-g¯ære n., -gâr m. _spear, dart, javelin_, #Gl#.

ætgangan^7 _to go to, approach_, _Az_ 183. ['_atgo_']

ætgeddre, -gedre = ætgædere

ætgenumen _removed, taken away_, WW 529^39.

¯ætgiefa ¶ (eo, i) m. _food-giver, feeder_.

ætgifan^5 _to render, give_, B 2878.

ætglîdan^1 _to slip away, disappear_, OEG 7^132.

ætgr¯æpe _seizing_. æ. weorðan _seize_, B 1268.

æthabban _to retain_, Æ.

æthealdan^7 _to keep back_, #Sc# 109^18.

æthebban^6 _to take away, take out, hold back_, Æ: _exalt oneself_, CP
113^13.

æthindan prep. w. d. _behind, after_, _Chr_; Æ. ['_athinden_']

æthlêapan^7 _to run away, flee, escape_, W 162^5.

æthlýp m. _assault_. [cp. ¯æhlýp]

æthrînan^1 _to touch, move_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_atrine_']

æthrine m. _touch_.

æthwâ _each, every one_.

æthwâre _somewhat_, #HGl# 421^37.

æt-hwega, -hwæga, -hweg(u) adv. _somewhat, tolerably, a little_: _how_.

æthweorfan^3 _to return, go back_, B 2299.

æthwôn adv. _almost, nearly_.

æthýd '_eviscerata_,' (_skinned_? BT), WW 392´.

ætiernan^3 _to run away_, _Æ_. ['_atrin_']

ætîewan (oð-; ê, êa, êo, î, ý) pret. sg. -îe(w)de, (tr.) _to show,
reveal, display, disclose, manifest_, _Mt_ (ý), CP: (intr.) _show
oneself, become visible, appear_, _Mt_ (ý). ['_atew_']

¯æting f. _eating_, #Sc# 170^45 (ê): _pasture_? Mdf.

¯ætinge (y^2) _speechless_, OEG 46^45.

ætis pres. 3 sg. of ætwesan, ætbêon.

ætîw- = ætîew-, ætýw-

ætl¯ædan (= oð-) _to drive away_, _Æ_. ['_atlead_']

¯ætlic adj. _eatable_, WW, LkL (ê).

ætlicgan^5 _to lie idle_, _ÆGr_ 2^22. ['_atlie_']

ætlimpan^3 _to fall away from, escape, be lost_, Æ.

ætlûtian _to lurk, hide_, _Æ_. ['_atlutien_']

ætnêhstan (ý) adv. _at last_.

ætnes f. _edibility_, WW 226^11.

ætniman^4 _to take away, deprive of_, #Ex# 414.

ætol = etol

¯æton pret. pl. of etan.

¯ætor = âtor

¯ætorcynn = âtorcynn  [[headword spelled "âtorcyn"]]

¯ætran = ¯ætrian

ætreccan w. d. and a. _to declare forfeit, deprive of_, #Lcd#.

¯ætren _poisoned, poisonous_, _MtL_ (-ern). ['_attern_']

¯ætrenmôd _of venomous spirit, malignant_ (or? two words), #GnE# 163.

¯ætrennes f. _poisonous nature_, #Lcd# 55a.

±¯ætrian _to poison_, _AO_: _become poisonous_. ['_atter_']

ætrig _poisonous_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_attery_']

ætrihte (y) I. adj. _right at, near, present, at hand_. II. adv.
_almost, nearly_.

ætsacan^6 _to deny_, _Lk_; Æ: _renounce_, _Mk_. ['_atsake_']

ætsamne (æ, e, o) adv. _united, together, at once_, AO.

ætscêotan^2 _to escape, disappear_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

ætscûfan^2 _to shove away_.

ætsittan^5 _to sit by, remain, stay_, _Chr_. ['_atsit_']

ætslâpan^7 _to sleep beside_, #Lcd# 83a.

ætslîdan^1 _to slip, glide, fall_, _Æ_.

ætsomne (Æ) = ætsamne

ætspornan^3 (u) _to strike against, stumble, go wrong_, CP:
_rebel_ (æt).

ætspornung f. _offence, stumbling-block, misfortune_, CM 230.

ætspringan^3 _to rush forth, spurt out_, _B_ 1121. ['_atspring_']

ætspringnes, -sprung(en)nes f. _defection_.

ætspurnan = ætspornan

ætspyrning = ætspornung

ætst = itst pres. 2 sg. of etan.

ætst- = oðst-

ætstæl m. _aid, assistance_ (GK); = ætsteall (BT), #Gu# 150.

ætstæppan^6 _to step up to_, B 745.

ætstandan^6 _to stand still, stand at, near, in or by_, _Æ_: _remain,
stand up_: _check, resist_, Æ: _cease_, _Lk_; Æ. ['_atstand_']

ætstandend m. _bystander, attendant_, Æ.

ætstandende _standing by_, GD 284^21.

ætsteall m. _assistance, meeting with hostile intent_ (GK): _station,
camp station_ (BT), #Wald# 1^21.

ætstent v. ætstandan.

ætstente v. ætstyntan.

ætstillan _to still_, #Lcd# 25b.

ætstrengan _to withhold wrongfully_, LL 206´.

ætstyntan _to blunt, dull, weaken_.

ætswerian^6 _to deny on oath_, LL.

ætswîgan _to keep silence about_ (be) GD 217^18.

ætswimman^3 _to escape by swimming, swim out_, #Chr# 918.

âettan (âyttan) _to eat up_.

¯ætter, ¯ættor = âtor

¯ættr- = ætr-

ætðringan^3 _to take away from, deprive of_.

ætweaxan^1 _to increase_ (Swt.).

ætwegan^5 _to bear away, carry off_, B 1198.

¯ætwela _abundance of food, feast_, #Soul# 123.

ætwenian _to wean from_, LL 368´.

ætwesan anv. _to be at hand_.

ætwesende _at hand, imminent_, WW.

ætwindan^3 _to escape_, _Æ_. ['_atwind_']

ætwist I. ¶ f. _presence_. II. = edwist

ætwîtan^6 _to reproach (with)_, _censure, taunt_, _Met, Ps_; CP.
['_atwite_']

ætwrencan _to seize by fraud_.

ætýcan _to add to, increase_, BH. [îecan]

ætýcnes f. _increase_, BH.

¯ætýnan = ontýnan

¯ætynge = ¯ætinge

ætys = ætis pres. 3 sg. of ætwesan.

æt-ýwan, -ýwian = ætîewan

ætýwednes f. _showing, appearance, manifestation, revelation_, GD.

ætýwigendlic _demonstrative_, #ÆGr#.

ætýwnes f. _showing, manifestation, revelation_: _apparition_, Æ:
_Epiphany_.

ætýwung f. _manifestation, Epiphany_, CM 531.

¯æðan I. (±)_to make oath, swear_. [âð] II. = îðan

æðel = æðele

¯æðel == êðel

æðelboren _of noble birth, distinguished_, Æ: _free-born_, Æ: _inborn,
natural_.

æðelborennes f. _nobility of birth or nature_, Æ: _inborn nature_, OEG
4518.

æðelcund _of noble birth_.

æðelcundnes f. _nobleness_, #Bo# 46^13.

æðelcyning m. _noble king (Christ)_, Æ.

æðelduguð f. _noble retinue_, #Cr# 1012.

æðele _noble, aristocratic, excellent, famous, glorious_, _Ex, Gen_; Æ,
AO, CP: _splendid, fine, costly, valuable_: _lusty, young_: _pleasant,
sweet-smelling_, _Gen_: (+)_natural, congenial, suitable_. ['_athel_']

æðel-ferðingwyrt, -fyrdingwyrt f. _stitch-wort (plant)_, #Lcd#.

+æðelian ¶ _to make noble or renowned_, _Hy_. ['_i-athele_']

æðelic = æðellic

âðelic = êaðelic

æðeling m. _man of royal blood, nobleman, chief, prince_, AO, #Chr#
(v. LL 2·274): ¶_king, Christ, God_, _Cr_: ¶_man, hero, saint_; in pl.
_men, people_, _Gen_. ['_atheling_']

æðelinghâd n. _princely state_, #Lcd# 3·438^5.

æðellic _noble, excellent_. adv. -lîce.

æðelnes f. _nobility, excellence_.

æðelo = æðelu

æðelstenc m. _sweet smell_, #Ph# 195.

æðeltungol ¶ n. _noble star_.

æðelu fn. _nobility, family, descent, origin_, CP: _nature_: _noble
qualities, genius, talents, pre-eminence_, _Bo_: _produce, growth_.
['_athel_']

¯æð- = êð-

¯æðm (ê) m. _air, breath, breathing_, CP; _Sat_. (ê): _vapour_, _B_:
_blast_, Æ. ['_ethem_']

¯æðmian _to fume, exhale, emit a smell_.

¯æðre = ¯ædre

¯æðreclic _terrible_, #RPs# 95^4.

¯æðret- = âðryt-

¯æðrot n. _disgust, weariness_. [âðrêotan]

¯æðryt I. _troublesome, wearisome, disgusting_. II. n. _weariness,
disgust, tediousness_, Æ.

¯æðryte = ¯æðryt I.

¯æðrytnes f. _tedium_, v. OEG 4582.

¯æðryttan _to weary_, Æ.

æðða (Bd, Death-song) = oððe

¯æw I. = ¯æ. II. = ¯æwe

¯æw¯æde _without clothes_, WW 230^38.

¯æwan _to despise, scorn_, #Ps#.

¯æwbr¯æce _despising the law_, Æ: _adulterous_, LL.

¯æwbreca (i, y) m. _adulterer_, _LL_ (y). ['_eaubruche_^2']

¯æwbryce m. _adultery_, Æ; _LL_. ['_eaubruche_^1']

¯æwda, æwdamann m. _witness, compurgator_, LL.

¯æwe I. fn. _married woman_, Æ: _married people_. II. _lawful_:
_married_: _born of the same marriage_.

¯æwelm = ¯æwielm

¯æwenbrôðor m. _brother by the same marriage_, WW 413^29.

¯æwêne _doubtful, uncertain_.

¯æwerd adj.? _religious_, or sb.? _regular priest_, ANS 128·298. [cp.
¯æweweard]

æwerdla = æfwyrdla

¯æweweard m. _priest_, #Bl# 161^27.

¯æwfæst _upright, pious, devout, religious_, Æ, CP: _married_, Æ.

¯æwfæsten n. _legal or public fast_.

¯æwfæstlic _lawful_: _religious_, CP (¯æf-). adv. -lîce.

¯æwfæstnes f. _religion, piety_.

¯æwicnes f. _eternity_, #RPs# 102^17 (v. p. 303).

¯æwielm (e, i, y), -wielme m. _source, fount, spring, beginning_, AO, CP.
[= êawylm]

¯æwintre = ânwintre

¯æwis- = ¯æwisc-

¯æwisc I. nf. _offence, shame, disgrace, dishonour_, AO. [_Goth._
aiwisks] II. _disgraced, shameless, indecent_.

¯æwiscberende _disgraceful, shameful_, WW 264^42.

¯æwisce = ¯æwisc I.

¯æwisc-ferinend (#Gl#), -firina (NG) m. _shameless sinner, publican_.

¯æwisclic _disgraceful, infamous_, OEG.

¯æwiscmôd _ashamed, abashed, cowed_.

¯æwiscnes f. _shameless conduct_: _reverence_.

¯æwita m. _counsellor_, #El# 455.

¯æwlic _legal, lawful_. adv. -lîce.

±¯æwnian _to marry_, Æ.

¯æwnung f. _wedlock_, OEG.

¯æwul _basket with a narrow neck for catching fish_, WW 181^11.
[?= cawl, BT]

¯æwumboren _lawfully born_, LL 76´.

¯æwung = ¯æwnung

¯æwunge = êawunge  [[under "êawunga"]]

¯æwyll m. _stream_, BC 1·542.

¯æ-wylm, -wylme = ¯æwielm

æwyrdla = æfwyrdla

¯æwyrp m. _throwing away_: _what is cast away_: _an abortion_. [âweorpan]

¯æwysc- = æwisc-

æx == æcs, eax

æxe = asce

æxeýr f. _axe-head_, #Chr# 1012#e#. [ýr]

æxfaru f. _'apparatus,' naval expedition_? (= æsc-? v. ES 37·184), #Gl#.

æxian = ascian  [[headword spelled "âscian"]]

æxl = eaxl

æxs = æcs

âf¯ædan = âfêdan

âf¯ægan _to depict, figure_, BH. [fâg]

âf¯ægrian (æ) _to ornament, adorn_, BH.

â-fælan, -fællan = âfyllan II.

âf¯æman _to foam out_, #PPs# 118^131.

âf¯æran _to frighten_, _PPs, Mk, Chr_; AO, CP. ['_afear_,' '_afeared_']

âfæst = ¯æwfæst

âfæstan I. _to fast_, LL, W. II. _to let out on hire_, MkR 12^1.

âfæstla interj. _certainly! assuredly!_ Æ.

âfæstnian (e) _to fix upon, fasten, make firm, confirm_, AO: _enter,
inscribe_, Æ: _build_.

âf¯ættian _to fatten, anoint_, #APs# 22^6; #LPs# 140^5.

âfandelic = âfandodlic  [[under "âfandigendlic"]]

âfandian _to try, test, prove, tempt_, _Lk, Lcd_; Æ, CP: _find out,
experience_, Æ. âfandod (and âfanden?) _approved, excellent_, Æ.

âfand-igendlic, -odlic _proved, approved, laudable_. adv. -odlîce.

âfandung f. _trial_, Æ.

âfangennes f. _reception, acceptance_.

afara = eafora

âfaran _to go out, depart, march, travel_, Æ, AO; _Da_ 6. ['_afare_']

âfeallan^7 _to fall down, fall in battle_, _Lk_; CP: _fall off, decay_.
['_afalle_']

âfeallan = âfyllan

âfêdan _to feed, nourish, bring up, maintain, support_, _Æ_; AO: _bring
forth, produce_. ['_afede_']

âfêgan _to join_, DR (oe).

âfehtan (DR) = âfeohtan

âfellan = âfyllan

âfelle = ¯æfelle

âfeohtan^3 _to fight, fight against, attack_, AO: _tear out, destroy_.

âfêon '_odisse_,' #PPs#.

âfeormian _to cleanse, purge, purify_.

âfeormung f. _scouring, cleansing, purging_, #Sc#.

â-feorran, -feorrian (CP) = âfierran

âfeorsian _to remove, do away, expel, dispel_, Æ: _go away_.

âfer = âfor

afera = eafora

âfêran = âf¯æran

aferian _to provide horses for team work (as service for a lord)_,
v. ANS 109·73f.

â-ferian (#Gl#), -ferran = âfierran

âferscan _to become fresh_, #Bo# 86^20.

âfersian = âfeorsian

âfestnian (WW 49^8) = âfæstnian

afetigan = hafetian

âfierran (eo, i, y) _to remove, withdraw, depart_: _estrange from, take
away, expel, drive away_, CP. [feorr]

âfierrednes (y) f. _removal_, NC 270.

âfîgen _fried_, #Gl#.

âfilgan _to pursue_, #Gen# 14^15.

âfindan^3 (= on-) _to find, find out, discover, detect_, _Jn_; Æ:
_experience, feel_, Æ. ['_afind_']

âfir- = âfierr-, âfeor-, âfyr-

âfirðan (= y) _to remove_, #Lcd# 1·294n.

âflægen pp. of âflêan.

âfl¯æman = âflîeman

âflêan^6 _to strip off, flay_, GD.

âflêgan (DR) = âflîegan

âflêman = âflîeman

âflêon^2, -flêogan _to fly, flee away_, _Gu_: _fly from, escape_.
['_aflee_']

âflêotan^2 _to skim_, #Lcd#.

âflîan = âflîegan

âflîegan (î, ý) _to put to flight, expel_, _Æ_ (î). ['_afley_']

âflîeman (ý) _to put to flight, expel, scatter, disperse, rout_, _Chr_;
CP: _banish_. ['_afleme_']

âflîgan = âflîegan

âflîgung f. _attack_? #Lcd# 1·338^12.

-âflîung v. mete-â.

âflôwan^7 _to flow, flow away or from, pass away_, AO, CP.

âflýg-, âflýh- = âflîeg-

âflygennes f. _attack_ (BT), #Lcd# 1·366^7.

âflýman = âflîeman

âfôgian = âwôgian

afol n. _power, might_, LL (304^22).

âfôn (= on-) _to receive, take in, take_, _Mk, Ps_: _lay hold of,
seize_, _MtR, Jul_: _hold up support_. ['_afong_']

âfondian = âfandian

âfor _bitter, acid, sour, sharp_: _dire, fierce severe, harsh,
impetuous_. [_OHG._ eivar, eibar]

afora = eafora

âforhtian _to be frightened, take fright, wonder at_, Æ.

â-frêfran, -frêfrian _to comfort, console, make glad_, CP. [frôfor]

âfrem-dan, -dian _to alienate_, Æ: _become alienated_.

âfremðan (#VPs#) = âfremdan

âfremðung f. _alienation_, VHy.

âfrêoðan^2 _to froth_, #Lcd# 45b.

âfrêon (-ia, N) _to deliver, free_.

afslôg = ofslôg  [[form of "ofslêan"]]

after = æfter

âfûlian _to become foul, putrefy, rot, be corrupt, defiled_.

afulic _perverse_. v. ES 42·162.

âfulliend m. _fuller_, MkR 9^3.

âfunde rare wk. pret. 3 sg. of âfindan.

âfundennes f. _invention, device, discovery_, Æ.

âfýlan _to foul, stain, defile, corrupt_, _CP_; Æ. ['_afile_']

âfyllan I. (w. g. or d.) _to fill, fill up, replenish, satisfy_, _Æ_;
AO: _complete, fulfil_. ['_afill_']. II. (y = ie) _to cause to fall,
fell, beat down, overturn, subvert, demolish, abolish_, _Lk_; Æ: _slay,
kill_. ['_afelle_']

âfyndan = âfindan

âfyr- = âfierr-

âfýran _to emasculate_. âfýred (CP), âfýrd pp. as sb. _eunuch_.

âfyrhtan _to frighten, terrify_, Æ, AO.

âfýrida = âfýred

âfyrran = âfierran

âfyrsian = âfeorsian

âfýsan (intr.) _to hasten_: _inspire with longing_, #Bl#: (tr.) _urge,
impel, excite_: _drive away_. [fûs]

âga m. _proprietor, owner_, GD 230^11.

âg¯ælan _to hinder, keep back, preoccupy, detain, hold back, retard,
delay_, AO: _neglect_, CP: _profane_.

âg¯ælwan _to terrify, astonish_, AO.

âgalan^6 _to sound forth, sing, chant_.

âgald = âgeald pret. 3 sg. of âgieldan.

âgâlian _to become slack_, CP 65^18.

âgan I. (conj. Wt 546) _to own, possess, have, obtain_, _An, Bo, Ma,
Mt_; AO, CP: _give, give up, deliver, restore_: _have to pay, 'owe,'_
_Mt, Lk_: _have to do_, ANS 123·417. â. ût _find out, discover_. II.
pret. 3 sg. of âginnan (onginnan).

âgân (conj. v. gân) _to go, go by, pass_ (of time), _Mk_. of â. _go
away_: _occur, befal_, Æ: _come forth, grow_, _Ps_: _approach_: _lose
strength_. ['_ago_']

âgangan = âgân

âge f. _possessions, property_. [_ON._ eiga]

agêan == ongêan

âgehw¯ær = ¯æhw¯ær

âgeldan I. ¶_to punish_. II. = âgieldan

âgêlwan = âg¯ælwan

âgêman = âgýman

âgen I. _'own,' proper, peculiar_, _BH, Sat, Mt_; AO, CP, #Chr#, Æ.
â. cyre _freewill_. âgnes ðonces _voluntarily, spontaneously_: _proper
(gram.)_, #ÆGr#. II. n. _property_, _LL_: _own country_. III. pp. of
âgan.

âgên == ongêan

agênbewendan _to return_.

âgêncuman^4 _to return_, Lk 8^40.

âgend m. _owner, possessor, master, lord_. se â. _the Lord_.

âgendfrêa I. m. _lord, owner_. II. f. _mistress_? #Gen# 2237.

âgendfrêo = âgendfrêa

âgendlîce _properly, as one's own_: _imperiously_, CP 145^5.

âgen-friga, -frige = âgendfrêa

âgêngehweorfan^3 _to return_.

âgênhwyrfan _to return_.

âgêniernan^3 _to run against, meet_.

âgênl¯ædan _to lead back_, WW 91^9.

âgenlic _own_: _owed, due_, DR.

âgennama m. _proper name_, #ÆGr# 25^16.

âgennes f. _property_, Æ.

âgênsendan _to send back_, Lk.

âgenslaga m. _slayer of oneself, suicide_, Æ.

âgênstandan^6 _to press, urge_, Lk.

âgenung = âgnung

âgêode = âêode pret. 3 sg. of âgân.

âgeolwian _to become yellow_.

âgêomrian _to mourn, grieve_, GD.

âgeornan = âgyrnan

âgêotan^2 _to pour out, pour forth, shed_, _MtL_; CP: _melt, found_
(of images): _destroy_: _deprive (of)_, #Jud# 32. ['_ageten_']

âgêtan = âgîtan

âgiefan^5 (eo, i, y) _to give, impart, deliver, give up, yield,
relinquish_, _Mt_ (y): _restore, return, repay, pay_, AO. eft â. _give
back, return_. ['_agive_']

âgieldan^3 (e, i, y) _to pay, repay, compensate, yield, restore,
reward_, AO: _offer oneself, offer up (as a sacrifice)_: _perform
(an office)_, Æ (y): _allow_: _to punish_? #Ph# 408.

âgîemelêasian (i, y) _to neglect, despise_, CP. âgîmelêasod _neglectful,
careless_, NC 337.

âgîeta = âgîta

âgifan (AO, CP) = âgiefan

âgifian _to bestow, grant_, DR 124^19.

âgift = ¯ægift

âgildan (CP) = âgieldan

âgilde = ¯ægilde

âgilpan^3 _to exult in_ (w. d.), #Soul# 165.

âgiltan = âgyltan

âgîmelêasian (C) = âgîemelêasian

âgimmed _set with precious stones_, Æ.

âginnan = onginnan

âgîta m. _prodigal, spendthrift_, CP.

âgitan = ongietan

âgîtan I. _to waste, destroy_, _Chr_. ['_aget_'] II. = âgêotan

âglâchâd m. _state of misery_, #Rd# 54^5.

âg-l¯æc, -lâc ¶ n. _trouble, distress, oppression, misery, grief_.

âgl¯æca ¶ (ê) m. _wretch, monster, demon, fierce enemy_.

âgl¯æccræft (âc-) m. _evil art_, #An# 1364.

âgl¯æcwîf n. _female monster_, B 1259.

âgl¯ædan? _to cause to slip_. v. AB 19·163.

âglêca = âgl¯æca

âglîdan^1 _to glide, slip, stumble_.

agn- = angn-

âgnere m. _owner_, #ÆGr# 110^19.

âgnes = âgenes gmn. of âgen adj.

âgnett n. _interest, usury_, LkL 19^23.

âgnettan _to appropriate_, #Gl#.

âgnettung f. '_usurpatura_'? Lk 19^23 (ES 42·163).

±âgnian _to 'own,'_ _Rd_: _claim_: _appropriate, usurp_, _Bo, Mt_; CP:
_make over (to)_, Æ.

âgnîdan^1 _to rub off_, WW 386^16.

âgniden I. f. _rubbing_, #Gl#? (v. A 31·533). II. _used, threadbare_, WW
220^24.

âgniend (âh) m. _owner, possessor_.

±âgniendlic _possessive, genitive (case)_, #ÆGr#.

+âgnod _own_, CP 262^23.

âgnung f. _owning, ownership, possession_: _claim, declaration or proof
of ownership_.

âgotenes f. _effusion, shedding_.

âgrafan^6 _to curve, hew, sculpture_, Æ: _engrave, inscribe_, Æ.

âgrafenlic _sculptured_, #ARSPs# 105^19.

âgrâpian _to grasp tightly_, ÆL 8^121.

âgrêtan (oe) _to attack_, LkLR 9^42.

âgrimetian (y) _to rage_, GD.

âgrîsan^1 _to quake, fear_, _LL_. ['_agrise_']

âgrôwen _overgrown_.

âgryndan _to descend_, #Men# 111.

âgrýsan = âgrîsan

agu f. _magpie_, WW 132^11.

Agustus m. _August_.

âgyf- = âgief-

âgyld- = âgield-, ¯ægild-

âgylpan = âgilpan

âgyltan _to offend, sin, do wrong_, _Æ_; CP. ['_aguilt_']

âgyltend m. _debtor_.

âgylting f. _guilt, offence_, DR.

âgyltnes f. _guilt_, NC 270.

âgýman (ê) _to regard, contemplate_, AS: _heal, cure_.

âgýmelêasian = âgîemelêasian

âgymmed = âgimmed

agynnan = onginnan

âgyrnan _to desire, be eager for_, GD 205^19 (eo).

âgytan = ongietan

ah (AO, CP) = ac (conj. and adv.)

âh pres. 3 sg. of âgan.

âh- = âg-

âhabban _to restrain_: (refl.) _abstain_ (fram): _support_.

âhaccian _to pick out_, ÆL 23^78.

âhæbban = âhebban

âhældan = âhildan

âhafennes f. _rising, lifting up_: _elevation, pride_.

âhalsian _to implore_.

âhangian _to hang_, LkL 23^39.

âhâtan _to name_, MtL 27^16.

âhâtian _to become hot_, WW 214^31.

âhealdan^7 (= on-) _to hold, keep_, DR, JnL.

âhealtian _to limp, crawl_, #LPs# 17^46.

âheardian _to be or become hard, grow hard or inured_, CP: _endure_.

âheardung f. _hardening_, #Lcd#.

âhêawan^7 _to cut off, out or down_, Æ, CP: _cut wood into planks_.

âhebban^6 (occl. wk. pret. âhefde and pp. âhefed) (often w. ûp) _to lift
up, stir up, raise, exalt, erect_, _Lk_; CP: _take away, remove_:
_support, uphold_: _leaven_. ['_aheave_']

âhebbian = âebbian

âhefednes = âhafennes

âhefegian (CP), -hef(i)gian (æ) _to make heavy, oppress_.

âheld (#VPs#) = âhyld pp. of âhyldan.

âhellian? _to cover over, conceal, hide_, OEG 5410.

âhelpan^3 _to help, support_ (w. g.).

âhênan _to humble_, LkL: _accuse_, NG. [hîenan; hêan]

âheolorian _to weigh, consider_, #Gl#.

âhêran = âhýran

âherian _to praise_, DR.

âhêrian = âhýrian

âherstan (#BPs#) = âhyrstan

âheten pp. of âhatan.  [[error for "âhâtan"?]]

âhicgan = âhycgan

âhîenan v. âhênan.

âhierdan (i, y) _to make hard, harden_, CP: _encourage, animate_.
[heard]

âhîeðan = âhýðan

âhildan (æ, e, y) _to bend, incline_, Æ: _rest, lay down_ (tr. and
intr.): _turn away, avert_: _cast down, destroy_.

âhirdan (CP) = âhierdan

âhîðan = âhýðan

âhladan^6 _to draw out, lead out, draw forth_, Æ: _exclude_, #Bk# 18.

âhl¯æca = âgl¯æca

âhl¯ænan _to set oneself up_, #Mod# 53.

âhl¯ænsian _to become lean_, Æ.

âhlêapan^7 _to leap, spring up_, AO.

âhlêfan (oe) _to pull out_, DR 55^10.

âhlêoðrian _to sound, resound_, GD.

âhlîehhan^6 _to laugh at, deride_: _laugh out, exult_.

âhlin-ian, -nan = âlinnan

âhlocian _to dig out_, #Gl#, MtR 5^29. [?= *âlocian, cp. lucan (BT) and
v. ES 42·165]

âhlôwan _to roar again_, WW 492^11.

âhlûttrian _to cleanse, purify_.

âhlyhhan = âhliehhan  [[headword spelled "âhlîehhan"]]

âhlýttrian = âhlûttrian

âhn- = âgn-

âhnêopan^2 _to pluck off_, #Gu# 819.

âhnescian _to become soft or effeminate_, AO: _weaken_. [hnesce]

âhnîgan^1 _to fall down_: _bow down_.

âhogian _to think out, be anxious about_, GD.

âholan = âholian

âholian _to hollow, scoop out_, CP. ût â. _to root out, pluck out_:
_engrave, emboss_.

âhôn^7 _to hang, suspend, crucify_, _MkLR_; AO, CP. ['_ahang_']

âhopian _to hope for_ (tô), #Bl# 17^23.

âhr¯æcan _to spit out_, #Lcd# 9a.

âhræscian _to shake off_? (BT), #LPs# 108^13.

âhreddan _to set free, save, rescue, re-capture_, _AO_; Æ. ['_aredde_']

âhredding f. _salvation, deliverance_, HL 9^281, EC 230.

âhrêofian _to become leprous_, MH 174^12.

âhrêosan^2 _to rush_: _fall, fall down_, Æ: _be destroyed_.

âhrepian _to treat_, FBO 80^5.

âhrêran (= on-) _to move, shake, make to tremble_, CP.

âhrînan^1 (= on-) _to touch, handle_, _Lk_. ['_arine_']

âhrisian (y) _to shake, stir up_, _CP_: _shake off_. ['_arese_']

âhrýnan = âhrînan

âhrýran _to cause to fall, destroy_, #Gl#.

âhrysian = âhrisian

ahse = asce

âhsian = âscian

aht = eaht

âht = âwiht

ahta = eahta

âhte, âhton pret. 3 sg. and pl. of âgan.

âhtes (= g. of âht) _of any account or value_.

âhtlîce _stoutly, manfully_, #Chr# (E).

âhwâ pron. _any one_.

âhw¯ænan _to vex, grieve, afflict_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_awhene_']

âhwænne adv. _when, whenever_: _at sometime, any time_, RB: _at all
times_.

âhw¯ær (â, ê) _anywhere_, _Bo, LL, Æ_: _at any time, ever, in any way_.
['_owhere_']

âhw¯ærgen _anywhere_: _in any case_.

âhwæt n. _anything_.

âhwæðer (âwðer, âðer, âðor) I. pron. _some one, something_; _any one_:
_anything_. II. adv. and conj. _either_, _AO, CP_. âðer...oððe =
_either...or_, _AO, LL_. ['_outher_']

âhwanon = âhwonan

âhwâr = âhw¯ær

âhwelfan = âhwylfan

âhweorfan^3 (tr.) _to turn, turn away, convert_: (intr.) _turn aside,
turn away_, _Gen_: _avert_. ['_ahwerf_']

âhwêr == âhw¯ær

âhwerfan = âhwierfan

âhwettan _to whet, excite, kindle_, AO: _hold out to, provide_:
_reject_.

âhwider _in any direction, from any source_, Æ.

âhwierfan _to turn away, turn from, avert_, CP.

âhwilc = ¯æghwilc

âhwistlian v. âwistlian.

âhwîtian _to whiten_, #BJPs# 50^9.

âhwonan _from any source, anywhere_.

âhwonne = âhwænne

âhwyder = âhwider

âhwylfan _to cover over, submerge, subvert_, Æ: _to roll to_, MP 1·592.
up â. _pull up, loosen_.

âhwyrfan = âhwierfan

âhycgan ¶ _to think out, devise_.

âhýdan _to hide, conceal_.

âhyldan = âhildan

âhyldendlic _enclitic_, #ÆGr# 265^1. [âhildan]

âhyltan _to trip up_, #PPs# 139^5.

âhýran (ê) _to hire_.

âhyrdan = âhierdan

âhyrdung f. _hardening_, #Sc# 232^19.

âhýrian = âhýran

âhyrstan (= ie) _to roast, fry_, #Lcd# 33b; #BPs# 101^4 (e).

âhyspan _to reproach_, #LPs# 101^9.

âhýðan (îe, î) _to plunder, destroy, devour_. [hûð]

âîdan (ý)? '_eliminare_,' v. OEG 7^109n; BT.

â-îdlian, -îdlan, -îdelian _to be or make useless, frustrate, empty,
annul_, Æ, CP: _profane_: _be free from_: _deprive (of)_. [îdel]

âiernan^3 _to run away, run out, go over_: _pass by, go_.

âîeðan (¯æ, î, ý) _to lay low, demolish, destroy, cast out_.

al = eall, æl

âl n. _fire, burning_, OEG 4389; 4470. [cp. ¯ælan]

âlâdian _to excuse_, #Bo# 144^5. âlâdiendra '_excussorum_,' #BPs# 126^4.

âlæccan _to catch, take_, #Chr# 1123.

âl¯ædan (tr.) _to lead, lead away, carry off, withdraw, conduct, bring_,
Æ: (intr.) _be produced, grow, come forth_.

âlænan _to lend_, _Æ_: _grant, lease_. ['_alene_']

âlær = alor

âl¯æran _to teach_, #PPs# 118^108.

âl¯æson pret. pl. of âlesan.

âl¯ætan^7 _to let go, give up, leave, lose, resign, lay aside_, _Jn_; AO,
CP: _let, allow_: _release, pardon, forgive_: _deliver_, Æ. ['_alet_']

âl¯ætnes f. _loss_: _remission (of sins)_.

alan^6 _to nourish, produce_. [_Goth._ alan]

âlangian (impers.) _to affect with longing_, _Soul_ 154. ['_along_']

âlatian _to grow sluggish or dull_, #Gl#.

alað I. = ealað (v. ealu). II. pres. 3 sg. of alan.

âlâðian^1 (#Gl#) _to be hateful_: _hate_: _threaten_.

alb f. _while garment, 'alb,'_ _LL_. [_L._]

ald (EWS, EK, A) == eald

âld = âdl

âlecgan _to put, place, lay down, lay aside, give up, cease from,
abandon_, _LL_; Æ, AO, CP. âlecgende word, âlecgendlic word _deponent
verb_: _put down, allay, suppress, abolish, conquer, destroy, overcome,
refute_, _Æ, LL_: _lay upon, inflict_: _diminish, lessen, withhold_, Æ.
['_allay_']

âlêd I. pp. of âlecgan. II. = âl¯æd pp. of âl¯ædan.

âlêfan = âlîefan

âlêfednes f. _infirmity_, ÆL 21^99.

âlêfian _to injure, maim_; _enfeeble_, Æ. pp. _ill_, Æ. [lêf]

âlenian (K) = âlynnan

âlêodan^2 ¶ _to spring up, grow_.

âleofian = âlifian

âlêogan^2 _to lie, deny, deceive, be false to, leave unfulfilled_,
Æ, AO.

âlêon^1 (= on-) _to lend, give up_, DR.

âleonian = âlynnan

âlêoran _to depart, flee away_, #VPs# 51^7.

âleoðian = âliðian

aler == alor

âlês- = âlîes-

âlesan^5 _to pick out, choose_.

âlet (#Da# 254) = ¯æled

âlêtan = âl¯ætan

âlêðran = âlýðran

alewe, al(u)we f. '_aloe_,' _Jn, Lcd_.

âlêwed ptc. _feeble, weak, ill_. [lêf]

alexandre f. _horse-parsley_, _Lcd_. ['_alexanders_']

alfæle (#An# 770) = ealfelo

âlfæt n. _cooking vessel, cauldron_. [¯ælan]

âlgeweorc n. _fire-making, tinder_, #Gl#.

algian = ealgian

alh == ealh

âlibban _to live, pass one's life_, AO.

âlibbende _everlasting_.

âlicgan^5 _to be subdued, fail, cease, yield, perish_, AO.

âlîefan (ê, î, ý) _to allow, give leave to, grant_, AO, CP: _hand over,
yield up_.

âlîefedlic _lawful, permissible_. adv. -lîce (CP, Æ).

âlîefednes (ý) f. _permission_.

âlîesan (ê, î, ý) _to loosen, let loose, free, redeem, release,
absolve_, _Mt_ (ý), AO, CP. ['_alese_']

âlîes-ednes, -(e)nes (ê, ý) f. _redemption, ransom_, _MtWLR: _remission
(of sins)_, ERHy 9^77.

âlîesend (ê, î, ý) m. _liberator, deliverer, Redeemer_, CP.

âlîesendlic (ý) _loosing, liberating_, BH.

âlîesing, -lîesnes (ý) = âlîesednes

âlîf n. _eternal life_, MFH 108^160.

âlîfan = âlîefan

âlifian = âlibban

âlîh (DR) imperat. sg. of âlêon.

âlîhtan _to lighten, relieve, alleviate, take off, take away_:
'_alight_,' _ÆGr_: (= onlîhtan) _light up_, _Æ_.

âlimpan^3 ¶ _to occur, happen_.

âlinnan = âlynnan

âlîsend = âlîesend

âliðian (eo) _to detach, separate_, _Gen_: _set free_. ['_alithe_']

all (strictly Anglian, but found in AO, CP) == eal, eall

almes- = ælmes-

aln- = ealn-

alo- = ealu-

âloccian _to entice_, AO.

alor, al(e)r m. '_alder_,' _Gl, KC, Lcd_; Mdf.

alordrenc m. _drink made of alder sap_? #Lcd# 40a.

alorholt nm. _alder-wood_, WW.

alorrind m. _alder-bark_, #Lcd# 12b.

aloð = ealu

alr == alor

alswâ = ealswâ

alter, altar(e), altre m. '_altar_,' _Æ_; CP. [_L._ altare]

âlûcan^2 _to pluck up, pull out, separate, take away_.

âlutan^2 (= onl-) _to bend, incline, bend or bow down_, Æ. âloten pp.
_submissive_.

aluwe, alwe = alewe

alwald- = eal(l)weald-

âlybban = âlibban

âlýfan (Æ) = âlîefan

âlýfed I. = âlîefed pp. of âlîefan. II. = âlêfed pp. of âlêfian.

âlýfed- = âlîefed-

âlýht- = onlîht-

âlyhtan = âlihtan  [[headword spelled "âlîhtan"]]

âlýman _to come forth, shew forth_.

âlynnan, -lynnian (e, eo, i) _to deliver, let go, release, loosen_, Æ.

âlýs- = âlîes-

âlýðran (ê) _to lather_, #Lcd#. [lêaðor]

am (NG) = eom

âm m. _reed or slay of a loom_, #Rd# 36^8.

âmællian = âmeallian

âm¯ænsumian = âmânsumian

âm¯æran I. _to extol_, GD 206^24. II. (usu. ûtâm¯ær(i)an) _to
exterminate_, BH.

âmæstan _to feed with mast, fatten, feed up_, CP.

âmagian (hamacgian) _to revive, be restored to health_, #Lcd# 3·184^21.

âman = onman  [[form of "onmunan"]]

âmang prep. w. d. _among, amongst_: _while, whilst, during_. â. ðâm,
ðissum _meanwhile_. [= gemang]  [[listed as "+mang"]]

âmanian _to exact, require_, LL.

âmânsian = âmânsumian

âmânsung = âmânsumung

âmânsumian _to excommunicate, anathematize, curse, proscribe, outlaw_,
_BH_; Æ, AO. ['_amanse_']

âmân-sumung, -sumnung f. _excommunication, curse_, _Æ_. ['_amansing_']

âmarod _disturbed, troubled, confounded_. [cp. âmyrred]
  [[form of "âmyrran"?]]

âmasian _to amaze, confound_.

âmâwan^7 _to cut down_, #PPs# 101^4.

âmb (A 9·265) = âm

ambeht == ambiht

amber (e^1, o^1, æ^2, o^2, u^2) mfn. _vessel, pail, pitcher, tankard_:
_cask, dry or liquid measure_ (? _four bushels_). [_L._ amphora]

ambiht (e^1, o^1, y^1, e^2) I. n. _office, service_: _commission,
command, message_. II. m. _attendant, messenger, officer_.

+ambihtan (embe-) _to minister, serve_, NG.

ambihtere (embe-) m. _servant_, #LkL# 22^26.

ambihthêra _obedient servant_, #Gu# 571 (o^1).

ambihthûs n. _workshop, 'officina,'_ CM 1087.

ambihtmann m. _manservant_.

ambihtmecg ¶ (o^1, e^2, y^2) m. _servant_.

ambihtnes, -sumnes (emb-) f. _service_, NG.

ambihtscealc ¶ m. _functionary, retainer_.

ambihtsecg sm. _minister_, #Gen# 582.

ambihtsmið m. _court smith or carpenter_, LL 3[7].

ambihtðegn (omb-) ¶ m. _attendant, servant_.

ambyht = ambiht

ambyre _favourable, fair_, AO. [and, byre]

ambyrian (OEG 11^142) = onbyrgan II.

âmeallian (æ) _to become insipid_, v. OEG 61^4.

âmeareian _to mark out, delineate, define, describe_: _destine, assign,
appoint_.

amel m. _sacred vessel_, WW 348. [_L._]

âmelcan^3 _to milk_, #Lcd#.

âmeldian _to let out, make known, betray_, Æ, AO.

ameos _'ammeos,' bishop-weed_, #Lcd# 71b. [_Gk._]

amerian = hamorian

âmerian _to test, examine_: _purify, refine_.

âmerran = âmierran

âmetan^5 _to measure, estimate_: _mete out, assign, grant, bestow_, Æ.

âmêtan _to paint, depict_, CP: _adorn_, Æ.

âmetendlic _compendious, measurable, limited_. adv. -lîce.

âmethwîl = ¯æmethwîl

âmetsian _to provision_, #Chr# 1006#e#.

âmiddan = onmiddan

âmidian _to be foolish_, RHy 6^6.

âmîdlod _unbridled_, WW 226^38.

âmierran (e, i, y) _to hinder, obstruct, prevent, delay_, CP: _mar,
injure, disturb, scatter, consume, waste, spoil, destroy_, _Lk, Bo_; AO,
CP: _lose_. ['_amar_']

âmigdal m. _almond_, #Lcd#. [_Gk._]

âmôd = ¯æmôd

âmolcen pp. of âmelcan.

âmolsnian _to decay, weaken_, W 147^29.

âmolten _molten_, ÆL 5^234.

amore f. _a kind of bird, yellow-hammer_? [cp. emer]

am-pella, -pulla m. _flask, vessel_. [_L._]

ampre I. _'varix,' tumour, swelling_, _Gl_. ['_amper_'] II. f. _dock,
sorrel_, #Lcd#.

âmundian _to protect, defend_, Æ.

âmyltan (tr.) _to melt_, Æ.

âmyrdrian (LL 348, 56#a#) = âmyrðrian  [[under "âmyrðran"]]

âmyrgan _to delight, cheer_, #Sol# 240.

âmyrian = âmerian

âmyrran = (1) âmierran; (2) (LL 348, 56#g,b#) âmyrðran

â-myrðran, -myrðrian _to murder, kill_, _LL_; #Chr# 1049#c#.
['_amurder_']

an I. adv. and prep. = on. II. pres. 1 sg. of unnan.

an- in composition represents (1) and-; (2) un-; (3) in-; (4) on-.

ân I. adj. strong mfn. (asm. ânne, ¯ænne) '_one_,' _Mt, Æ_. in plur.
_each, every one, all_. ân and (æfter) ân _one by one_. ânes hwæt _some
single thing, a part_, B: _a, an_: _alone, sole, only_; in this sense it
is used also in the weak form (sê âna; hê âna, AO, CP) and with a pl.:
_singular, unique_: _single, each, every one, all_ (gp. ânra): _any_.
II. adv. (also wk. âna) _alone, only_. on ân _continually, continuously,
ever, in one, once for all, immediately_. ðæt ân _only that_.

ana = heonu

âna v. ân.

ânad, ânæd ¶ n. _waste, desert, solitude_. [_Ger._ einöde]

ânæglian _to nail_, #Nar# 4^25.

an¯æl- = on¯æl-

anæðelian _to degrade_, #Bo, Met#.

+ânan _to unite_, BH 214^3.

ananbêam m. _spindle-tree_, #Lcd# 29b.

anawyrm m. _intestinal worm_, #Lcd# 43b.

anbærnes = onbærnes  [[under "onbærning"]]

anbestingan^3 _to thrust in, insert_, CP.

anbid (= on-) n. _waiting, expectation, hope_; AO, CP: _interval_, AO.

±an-bidian (on-) intr. _to wait, stay_: tr. w. g. _wait for, expect_.

anbidstôw (on-) f. _place of meeting_, LL.

anbidung m. _waiting for, expectation_: _delay_, OEG 3396.

anbiht = ambiht

anbindan = onbindan

anbiscopod = unbiscopod

ânboren ¶ ptc. _only-begotten_.

anbringelle = onbringelle

anbrôce (#El# 1029) = unbr¯æce?

anbrucol (= on-) _rugged_, GPH 402.

anbryrd- = onbryrd-

ânbûend m. _hermit, anchorite_, #Gu# 59.

anbûgan (AO, CP) = onbûgan

anbyhtscealc = ambihtscealc

ânbýme _made of one trunk, dug-out (ship)_, WW 181^33.

±anbyrdan (and-) _to strive against, resist, oppose, attack_.

anbyrdnes f. _resistance_, LL 214[14].

anbyrignes (= on-) f. _tasting, taste_, WW.

ân-cenned (æ^2), -cend, _only-begotten_, Æ.

ancer == ancor

an-clêow n., -clêowe f. '_ankle_,' _Lcd, Æ_.

ancnâwan = oncnâwan

ancor m. '_anchor_,' _B, Bo_; CP. [_L._ ancora; from _Gk._]

ân-cor, -cora m. _anchorite, hermit_, Æ. [_L._ anachoreta; from _Gk._]

ancorbend (oncer-) m. _cable_, B 1918.

âncorlic _like a hermit_, WW 463^7.

âncorlîf n. _solitary life_, BH.

ancorman m. _man in charge of the anchor_, WW 166^7.

ancorrâp m. _anchor rope, cable_.

ancorsetl n. _prow of a ship_.

âncorsetl n. _hermitage_, Æ.

âncorsetla m. _hermit_, Æ.

âncorstôw f. _solitary place_, BH 424^12.

ancorstreng (ancer-) m. _cable_.

ancra = ancor

âncra (a^1?) m. _anchorite, hermit, monk_, _WW_; Æ. ['_anchor_']

ancsum == angsum

ancuman^4 _to arrive_, #Gen# 1884.

âncummum _one by one, singly_, NG.

âncyn adj. _only_, A 2·358; #LPs# 21^21.

and conj. _'and,' but_. gelîce and... _like as if..._ AO.

and- = an-, on-, ond- (_opposition, negation_. _Ger._ ent-): and
occasionally a-.

anda m. _grudge, enmity, envy, anger, vexation_, _Mt_; Æ: _zeal_, Æ, CP:
_injury, mischief_: _fear, horror_, NG. ['_ande_,' '_onde_']

ândæge ¶ _for one day, lasting a day_.

andæt- = andet-

ândaga m. _appointed day_, Æ.

±ândagian _to fix a day for appearance_: _adjourn_, EC 163.

andb- = anb-, onb-

andbêcnian _to make signs to_, WW.

andbita m. _feast (of unleavened bread)_.

andclêow = anclêow

andcweðan '_contradicere, frustrari_,' #HGl# 491.

andcwiss f. _answer_, #Gu# 992.

andcýðnes f. _evidence_, BH 158^5.

andd- = and-, ond-

ande == ende

andêages (æ) _eye to eye, in the face, openly_? B 1935.

andêaw _arrogant, ostentatious_, #Sc#.

andefn, -efen f. _measure, quantity, amount_, AO: _capacity,
nature_, CP.

andel-bær, -b¯ære _reversed_, OEG.

andergilde _at little cost_? (BT).

andet- = andett-

andetla m. _declaration, confession_, LL 18[22].

±andetnes (ond- CP) f. _confession_, Æ: _thanksgiving, praise_.

andetta m. _one who confesses_. a. bêon _to acknowledge_.

±andettan _to confess, acknowledge_, Æ, CP: _give thanks or praise_:
_promise, vow_. [and, hâtan]

andett-end, -ere m. _confessor_.

andettian = andettan

andettung m. _confession, profession_, CP.

andfang m. _acceptance_.

andfangol '_susceptor_,' #LPs# 45^12.

ândfealdlîce = ânfealdlîce

andfeax _bald_, W 46^1.

andfeng (on-) m. _seizing, receiving, taking_, Æ, RB: _defence_:
_defender_: _attack, assault_: _revenue, means_, Lk 14^28, #Bk# 10:
_illegal occupation of (land)_.

andfenga m. _receiver, defender, undertaker_, #Ps#.

andfenge I. _acceptable, agreeable, approved, fit, suitable_, Æ, CP:
_that can receive_: _taken_. II. m. _undertaker_: _receptacle_.

andfengend m. _defender_, #Ps#: _receiver_. gafoles a. _tax collector_.

andfengestôw f. _receptacle_, WW 213^43.

andfengnes f. _acceptance, receiving_: _receptacle_: _acceptableness_, W
253^21.

andfex = andfeax

andgelôman = andlôman

andget == andgit  [[under "andgiet"]]

andgete ¶ adj. _plain, manifest_. [andgiete]  [[under "andgiet"]]

andgiet (ond-; e, i, y) n., andgiete f. _understanding, intellect_,
_Mt_; Æ, CP: _knowledge, perception_, CP: _sense, meaning_, Æ, CP: _one
of the five senses_: _plan, purpose_. ['_angit_']

andgiet- = andgit-

andgitful _intelligent, sensible_.

andgitfullic _intelligible, clear_. adv. -lîce.

andgitlêas _foolish, senseless_, Æ.

andgitlêast f. _want of understanding_, Æ.

andgitlic = andgitfullic

andgitol _intelligent, sensible_.

andgittâcen § (ie^2) n. _sensible token, sign_.

andgyt = andgiet

andgyt- = andgit-

  [[Printed on one line:
  andgyt == andgiet, -git]]

andhêafod n. _heading, unploughed headland of a field_, EC.

andhetan, andhettan = andettan

andhweorfan^3 _to move against, blow against_, B 548. [or ? onhweorfan]

andian _to be envious or jealous_.

andig _envious, jealous_, OEG.

andlâman = andlôman

andlang (o^1, o^2) I. adj. _entire, continuous, extended_. andlangne
dæg, niht _all day (night) long_, _An, Gu_. [_'along_'] II. prep. w. g.
'_along,' by the side of_, _Æ, Chr, KC_; AO.

andlangcempa (anl-) _soldier fighting in line_, WW 450^18.

andlata (#Cr# 1436) = andwlita

andlêan ¶ n. _retribution, retaliation_.

and-leofen (ie, i, y) f., -leofa m. _sustenance, nourishment, food_:
_money, wages_. [libban]

andlîcnes = onlîcnes

andliefen (AO, CP), andlifen = andleofen

andlôman (â^2, u^2) m. pl. _utensils, implements, vessels_.

andlong = andlang

andlyfen = andleofen

andmitta = anmitta

andrecefæt? n. _wine or oil press_, WW 123^37.

andriesne = ondrysne

an-drysen-, -drysn- = ondrys(e)n-

and-rysno f. _respect, reverence_: _etiquette_.

andsaca m. _adversary_: _denier, apostate_.

andsacian _to dispute, deny_, CP.

andsæc m. _denial, oath of purgation_, _El, LL_: _refusal_: _strife,
resistance_. ['_andsech_']

ands¯æte adj. _hateful, odious, repugnant_, _Æ_: _hostile_. ['_andsete_']

andslyht ¶ m. _blow_.

andspeornan^3 _to stumble against_, NG.

andspyrnes f. _offence_, MtR 16^23.

ândstreces = ânstreces

and-sumnes, -sundnes (= on-) f. _purity, chastity, virginity_. v. OEG
1696.

±andswarian _to 'answer,'_ _Lk_; Æ, CP.

andswaru f. _'answer,' reply_, _B, Jn_; CP.

and-swerian (#VPs#), -sworian = andswarian

andsýn = ansîen

and-timber, -tymber = ontimber

andðracian = onðracian

andðræce = onðræce

andung f. _jealousy_, #LPs# 77^58.

andûstrian '_detestari_,' MtR 26^74.

andûstrung f. '_abominatio_,' MtR 24^15.

andw¯æscan = âdw¯æscan

andw¯æt _moist_.

andward- = andweard-

andweal- = onweal-

andweard (+ at AS 63^14) _present, actual, existing_, Æ, CP:
_opposite to_.

±andweardian _to present, bring before one_. (+andweardian also =
andwyrdian.)

andweardlic _present, actual_. adv. -lîce.

andweardnes f. _presence_, CP: _present time_.

andwendednes = onwendednes

andweorc n. _matter, substance, material_, CP: _cause_.

andwerd == and-weard, -wyrd

andwîg m. _resistance_, #Gu# 147.

andwille = ânwille

andwirdan = andwyrdan

andwîs _expert, skilful_, #Jul# 244.

andwîsnes f. _experience_, WW 20^5.

andwist f. _support_? _station_? #An# 1542.

andwlata = andwlita

+andwlatod '_frontosus_,' OEG 8^365.

andwlita (a, eo) m. _face, forehead, countenance, form_, _B, MtR_; AO,
CP. ['_anleth_']

andwlite n. = andwlita

andwliteful '_vultuosus_,' GPH 393.

andwrâð _hostile, enraged_, #Pa# 17.

and-wurd, -wyrd == andweard  [[under "andwurd"]]

±and-wyrdan, -wyrdian (e, i) _to answer_, _Æ, Mt_; AO, CP: (+an-)
'_conspirare_,' WW 209^42. ['_andwurde_']

andwyrde n. _answer_, AO.

andwyrding f. '_conspiratio_,' WW 373^11.

andýde pret. of andôn (ondôn).

andytt- = andett-

âne (1) = ¯æne, (2) heonu.

ân-êage, -ê(a)gede (_ÆL_) _'one-eyed,' blind of one eye_.

ânecge adj. _having one edge_, Æ.

+âned v. ânian.

ânêge, ânêgede = ânêage

ânêhst = ânîhst  [[headword spelled "anihst"]]

ânemnan _to announce, declare_, _Gu_. ['_aname_']

ânerian _to deliver, rescue_, #LPs# 24^15; #EPs# 49^22.

ânes = ¯ænes

ânescian = âhnescian

ânett mn., ânetnes f. _solitude, seclusion_, CP.

anf- = onf-

ân-feald, -fald, -fealdlic _single, unmixed, singular, unique,
superior_, _Æ_; CP: _simple, modest, honest, sincere_, _Mt_; CP: _fixed,
invariable_. â. gerecednes _or_ spr¯æc _prose_. ['_afald_'] adv. -lîce.

ânfealdnes f. _unity, concord_, AO: _simplicity_, CP.

anfealt f. _anvil_, OEG 11^67 and n. [cp. anfilte]  [[under "anfilt"]]

anfeng == andfeng

ânfête _one-footed_, #Rd# 59^1.

an-filt (_Æ_), -filte (_Gl_), n. '_anvil_.'

anfindan = onfindan

ânfloga m. _lonely flier_, #Seaf# 62.

anfôn (AO) == onfôn

anforht _fearful_, #Cross# 117.

ânforl¯ætan^7 _to let go, lose, relinquish, abandon, surrender_, CP:
_omit, neglect_.

ânforl¯ætnes f. _loss, desertion_, #Bl# 85^31: _intermission_.

anforngean _in front of_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

anga (o) m. _stimulus, sting, goad_, CP.

ânga (¯æ, ê) _sole, only_: _solitary_.

angbrêost n. _tightness of the chest, asthma_, #Lcd#.

ange = enge

angeald pret. 3 sg. of angildan.

angêan == ongêan

angel I. m. _'angle,' hook, fish-hook_, _Bo, MtL_ (ongul). II. m. =
engel

Angel n. _Anglen, a district in Schleswig, from which the Angles
came_, AO.

Angelcynn n. _the English people_: _England_, AO.

ângeld = ângilde

angelic _like, similar_, #Bo# 44^18.

angeltwicce fm. _a certain worm used as bait, earthworm_? _WW, Lcd_.
['_angletwitch_']

Angelðeod f. _the English people_: _England_.

ângenga I. _solitary, isolated_, Æ. II. m. _solitary goer, isolated
one_, B.

anger¯æd = ungerâd

ângetrum n. _illustrious company_, #Ex# 334.

angeweald = onweald

±angian _to be in anguish_, #RPs# 60^3; 142^4.

angien = anginn

angil = angel I.

angildan = ongieldan

ângilde (e, y) I. n. _single payment or rate of compensation for
damage_, _LL_: _the fixed price at which cattle and other goods were
received as currency_, LL. ['_angild_'] II. adj. _to be compensated
for_. III. adv. _simply, only_, LL.

ângildes = ângilde III.

anginn n. _beginning_, _Æ_; AO, CP: _intention, design, enterprise,
undertaking_, CP: _action, onset, attack_: _rising (of sun)_.
['_angin_']

anginnan (AO) = onginnan

angitan = ongietan

angitful = andgitful

Angle mp. _the Angles or English_ (who came from Anglen; v. Angel,
Engle).

angmôd _sad, sorrowful_.

angmôdnes f. _sadness, sorrow_, W 188^6.

angnægl m. _corn, 'agnail,'_ _Lcd_ 30b.

angnere (on-) m. _corner of the eye_, WW 423^34.

angnes f. _anxiety, uneasiness, trouble, pain, anguish, fear_.

angol- = angel-, ongol-

angrisla (y) m. _terror_, #Bl# 203^7.

angrislic (y^2) _grisly, terrible_. adv. -(en)lîce.

ang-set, -seta m. _eruption, pustule, carbuncle_, WW.

angsum _narrow, hard, difficult_.

±angsumian _to vex, afflict_, Æ.

angsumlic _troublesome, anxious, painful_. adv. -lîce Æ.

angsumnes f. _pain_, Æ: _sorrow, trouble_: _difficulty, perplexity_.

ângum = ¯ænigum dat. of ¯ænig.

ângyld, ângylde = ângilde

angyn = onginn

angytan = ongietan

anh- = onh-

ânhaga (o^2) ¶ m. _solitary being, recluse_.

anhende (= on-) _on hand, requiring attention_, AO 88^24.

ânhende _one-handed, lame, weak_, Æ.

ânhîwe '_uniformis_,' OEG 1046.

anhoga m. _care, anxiety_, #Gu# 970.

ânhoga = ânhaga

ânhorn, ânhorna m. _unicorn_, #Ps#.

ânhr¯ædlîce = ânr¯ædlîce

ânhundwintre _a hundred years old_.

ânhýdig ¶ _resolute, firm, constant, stubborn, brave_.

ânhyrne I. _one-horned, having one horn_. II. m. _unicorn_.

ânhyrn-ed, -e(n)de _having one horn_, #Ps#.

+ânian _to unite_, BH 214. ['_one_' vb.]

ânîdan (ê, ý) _to restrain, repel_: _force_. ût a. _expel, drive out_.
[nîed]

ânig = ¯ænig

ân-îge, -îgge = ânêage

anihst ¶ _last, in the last place_.

âniman^4 (y) _to take_, GD: _take away or from, deprive of_, _Mt_ (y);
CP. ['_anim_']

âninga = ânunga

âniðrian _to cast down_, #Chr# 675#e#.

anl- = andl-, onl-

anl¯æc = anlêc

±ânl¯æcan _to unite_, Æ.

ânlaga _acting alone_, WW 491^23.

anlang- = andlang-

ânlâp- (NG) = ânlîp-

anlêc m. _respect, regard_.

ânlegere _consorting with one man_, WW 171^15.

ân-lêp- = ânlîp-

ânlic _only, unique_: _solitary_: _catholic_: _beautiful_. [cp. ¯ænlic]

ânlîepig = ânlîpig  [[under "ânlîpe"]]

ân-lîpe (CP), -lîpig (#Chr#), -lîpie (æn-; ê, ý) I. adj. _single,
separate, solitary, private, individual, special_, _PPs_ 13^2, _BH,
MtR_. ['_anlepi_'] II. adv. _alone, only, severally_.

ânlîpnes f. _loneliness_.

ânlîpum (êp) _singly_, MtR 26^22.

ânlýp- = ânlîp-

ânmêde n. _unanimity, concord_, #PPs# 54^13.

anmêdla m. _pomp, glory_: _pride, presumption, arrogance_: _courage_.
[môd]

+anmettan _to encourage_, AO. [môd]

anmitta m. _weight, balance, scales_, #Gl#. [and, mitta]

anmôd _steadfast, resolute, eager, bold, brave, fierce, proud_, CP. adv.
-lîce.

ânmôd _of one mind, unanimous_, _El_; Æ. ['_anmod_'] adv. -lîce.

anmôdnes f. _steadfastness, resolution_, #Lcd# 3·170^22.

ânmôdnes f. _unity, unanimity_, CP.

ann pres. 3 sg. of unnan.

anna = heonu

ânne (AO, CP) v. ân.

ânnes f. _oneness, unity_, _BH_; Æ: _agreement, covenant_, _Chr_:
_solitude_, _Gu_. ['_annesse_']

ânnihte adv. _one day old_, #Lcd#.

anoða = anda

ânpæð ¶ m. _narrow path_.

anpolle f. (Æ) = ampella

anr- = onr-

ânr¯æd _of one mind, unanimous_: _constant, firm, persevering, resolute_,
_Æ_. ['_anred_']

ânr¯ædlic _constant, resolute_: _undoubting_, #Bl# 13^13. adv. -lîce
_unanimously_: _resolutely, persistently, constantly, earnestly_, Æ:
_definitely, decidedly_.

ânr¯ædnes f. _unanimity, agreement_: _constancy, firmness, diligence_,
_AO_; Æ. ['_anrednesse_']

ânreces (#Chr# 1010#cde#) = ânstreces

ânrêd- = ânr¯æd-

ans- = ands-, ons-, uns-

an-scêatan (Cp), -scêotan (Erf) = onscêotan

ânseld m. _lonely dwelling, hermitage_, #Gu# 1214.

ânsetl n. _hermitage_, RB 135^9.

ansetla m. _anchorite, hermit_, GD, RB.

ansîen I. (on-; ê, î, ý) fn. _countenance, face_, _CP, Lk_: _form,
figure, presence_: _view, aspect, sight, thing seen_, _AO_: _surface_.
['_onsene_'] II. ¶ f. _lack, want_.

anspel n. _conjecture_.

anspilde _salutary_, #Lcd# 11b.

ânspr¯æce _speaking as one_, #PPs# 40^7.

ânstandende ptc. _standing alone_, RB 9^7. as sb. _hermit_, Æ.

ânstapa m. _lonely wanderer_, #Pa# 15.

ânstelede _one-stalked, having one stem_, #Lcd#.

ânstîg f. _narrow path_? #Gl#.

ânstonde = ânstandende

ânstræc (¯æ?) _resolute, determined_, CP.

ânstreces (ê?) _at one stretch, continuously, continually_, #Chr#
894#a#.

ansund _sound, whole, entire, perfect, healthy_, Æ (on-).

an-sundnes, -sumnes f. _soundness, wholeness, integrity_.

ânsunu m. _only son_.

ânswêge _harmonious, accordant_.

ansýn = ansîen

ant- = and-, ont-, unt-

Antecrist m. _Antichrist_. [_L._]

antefn m. _antiphon, 'anthem,'_ _BH_; Æ.

antefnere m. _book of antiphons, antiphonary_, CM.

antemnere, antifonere (ÆP 154^6) = antefnere.

ântîd f. _similar time_ (_i.e._ the corresponding time of a following
day)? B 219.

antre f. _radish_, #Lcd#.

ânum _alone, solely_, Æ.

anunder = onunder

anung f. _zeal_, NG.

ânunga _at once, forthwith_: _entirely, altogether, throughout, by all
means, uninterruptedly_, B: _necessarily, certainly_.

anw- = andw-, onw-, unw-

ânwedd n. _security, pledge_, TC 201^16.

ânwîg n. _single combat, duel_, Æ, AO.

ânwîglîce _in single combat_, WW 512^21.

ânwiht = âwuht

ânwille I. adj. _wilful, obstinate_, _CP, WW_; Æ. ['_onwill_'] II. adv.
_wilfully, obstinately_.

ânwillîce _obstinately_, CP.

ânwilnes f. _self-will, obstinacy, persistence_, CP. mid ânwilnesse
_wantonly, wilfully_.

ânwintre adj. _one year old, yearling_.

ânwîte n. _single fine_, LL 64, 31, 1.

anwlôh (#Dan# 585) = onwealg?

ânwuht = âwuht

ânwunung f. _solitary abode_, RB 134^12.

ânwylnes = ânwilnes

anxsum- = angsum-

ânýdan = ânîdan

anýhst = anîhst  [[headword spelled "anihst"]]

ânyman = âniman

anýwan = onýwan

apa m. '_ape_,' _Gl, Lcd_.

âp¯æcan _to seduce, lead astray_.

âp¯æran _to avert, pervert_.

âparian _to discover, apprehend_, EC 164.

apelder- = apuldor-

âpinsian _to weigh, estimate, ponder, recount_, CP. [_L._ pensare]

âpinsung f. _weighing_, OEG 1757.

apl = appel

âplantian _to plant_, Æ.

âplatod _plated with metal_? _resplendent_? _OEG_. [v. '_plate_']

âpluccian _to pluck off_, #ÆGr# 170^14.

apostata m. _apostate_, LL (322^14).

apostol (#Chr#), apostel m. '_apostle_,' _MtR_: _disciple_, ÆH 1^520.
[_L._ apostolus; from _Gk._]

apostolhâd m. _apostleship_.

apostolic _apostolic_, _BH_; Æ. ['_apostly_']

appel, apple == æppel

Aprelis m. _April_, #Men# 56.

âpriccan _to prick_, W 146^21.

aprotane f. _southernwood, wormwood_, #Lcd# 22a. [_L._ abrotonum; from
_Gk._]

apulder, apuldor fm. _apple-tree_.

apuldorrind f. _bark of apple-tree_, #Lcd#.

apuldortûn m. _apple-orchard_, WW (e^3).

apuldre, apuldur = apulder

âpullian _to pull_, #Lcd# 1·362^10.

âpundrian? _to measure out, requite_? #El# 580 (GK).

âpyffan _to exhale, breathe out_, #Gl#.

âpyndrian _to weigh_, #HGl# 512^78? (BT).

âpýtan _to put out (eyes)_, NC 338.

âr m. I. ¶ _messenger, servant, herald, apostle, angel_. [_Got._ airus]
II. f. '_oar_,' _Chr, Gn_. III. f. _honour, worth, dignity, glory,
respect, reverence_, _BH, Gen, JnLR, Ph_; AO, CP: _grace, favour,
prosperity, benefit, help_, _B_: _mercy, pity_, #An#: _landed property,
possessions, revenue_, Æ, AO: _ecclesiastical living, benefice_:
_ownership_, LL: _privilege_, LL, 76, 42, 2. ['_are_,' '_ore_'] IV. n.
_ore, brass, copper_, Æ, AO, CP. V. (NG) = ¯ær

âracsian = ârâsian

âr¯æcan wv. _to reach, get at_, _Chr_: _hold forth, reach out_, Æ: _get
(a thing for a person)_, _Æ, Gr_. ['_areach_']

âr¯æd I. (ê) m. _welfare_, LL 184n. II. _prepared_?, _resolute_? #Wa# 5;
#GnE# 192? III. = ânr¯æd

âræda (#Bo# 46^22) = âroda? v. ârod.

âr¯ædan^1 (but usu. wk.) _to appoint, prepare_: _arrange, settle,
decide_, _BH_: _guess, prophesy, interpret, utter_, _Lk, Bo, Da, CP_:
_read, read out, read to (any one)_, CP. ['_aread_']

âr¯ædnes f. _condition, stipulation_, BH.

âr¯æfan _to set free, unwrap_, WW.

âræfnan, -ian _to carry out, accomplish_: _endure, suffer_, Æ, AO: _keep
in mind, ponder_, Æ. [æfnan]

âræfniendlic _endurable, possible_.

âr¯æman _to raise, elevate (oneself)_, Æ: (¶) _rise, stand up_.

âræpsan (*-ræf-) _to intercept_, #Gl#.

âr¯æran _to lift up, raise, set up, create, establish_, _Chr, An, Jn_:
_build, erect_, _Jn_: _rear (swine)_, LL 449: _spread, disseminate_:
_disturb, upset_. ûp â. _bring up, raise up, exalt_. ['_arear_']

âr¯ærend m. _one who arouses_.

âr¯ærnes f. _raising, elevation_, AO.

âr¯æsan _to rush_, ÆH 140^13.

ârâfian _to unravel, disentangle_, CP.

ârâsian _to lay open, search out, test, detect, discover_: _reprove,
correct_, CP. ârâsod _skilled_.

ârblæd n. _oar-blade_, Æ.

arblast m. _cross-bow_, #Chr# 1079#d#. [_OFr._ arbaleste]

arc mf. (also earc, earce) _ark, coffer, chest, box_, Æ. [_L._ arca]

arce (æ, e) m. _archiepiscopal pallium_.

arcebisceop (æ^1, e^1, y^3, eo^4) m. '_archbishop_,' _CP, Chr, KC_.

arcebiscopdôm m. _post of archbishop_.

arcebiscophâd (eo) m. _post of archbishop_, BH 49^23.

arcebiscoprîce n. _post of archbishop_, _Chr_.

arcebiscopstôl m. _archiepiscopal see_.

arcedîacon m. '_archdeacon_,' _WW_.

arcehâd (e) m. _post of archbishop_.

arcerîce n. _archbishopric_.

arcestôl (æ^1) m. _archiepiscopal see_, #Chr#.

ârcræftig _respected, honourable_, #Da# 551.

ârd¯æde _merciful_, #Bl# 131^2.

ârdagas mp. _festival days_, WW 206^31.

ardlic = arodlic

âre f. = âr III.

ârêafian _to separate, divide_, #Ex# 290.

âreccan _to spread out, put forth, stretch out_: _lift up, erect, build
up_: _say, relate, declare, speak out, explain, expound, translate_,
_MtR_; CP: _astonish_: _adorn_? _deck_? #Rim# 10. ['_arecche_']

ârêcelêasian _to be negligent_, A 9·102^68.

ared = arod

ârêd I. = âr¯æd I. II. (strong) pret. 3 sg. of âr¯ædan.

âreddan = âhreddan

ârêdian _to make ready, devise, provide, arrange, carry out_, CP: _find,
find one's way, reach_: _find out, understand_. [r¯æde]

ârêdnes = âr¯ædnes

ârêfnan = âr¯æfnan  [[headword spelled "âræfnan"]]

ârencan _to make proud, exalt_, A 11·117^32? (BT).

ârendan _to tear off_, #Lcd# 101a.

ârêodian _to redden, blush_, #BPs#.

ârêosan = âhrêosan

ârêran = âr¯æran

ârêtan _to cheer, gladden_, Æ. [rot]  [[main entry spelled "rot"]]

arewe = arwe

ârfæst _respected, honest, pious, virtuous_, Æ, CP: _merciful, gracious,
compassionate_, Æ: _respectful_.

ârfæstlic _pious_. adv. -lîce.

ârfæstnes f. _virtue, honour, grace, goodness, piety_: _pity, mercy_, Æ.

ârfæt nap. -fatu, n. _brazen vessel_, Æ.

ârfest = ârfæst

ârful _respected, venerable_: _favourable, kind, merciful_:
_respectful_. adv. -lîce _graciously_, Æ.

arg (NG) = earg

argang = earsgang

ârgeblond m. _tumult of the sea_, #An# 383.

argentille f. _argentilla (plant)_, #Gl#. [_L._]

ârgêotere m. _brass-founder_, AO 54^20.

ârgesweorf n. _brass filings_, #Lcd# 30b.

ârgeweorc n. _brass-work_, WW 398^24.

ârgifa m. _giver of benefits_, #Cra# 11.

arhlîce = earhlîce  [[under "earglic"]]

ârhwæt _eager for glory_, ¶#Chr# 937#a#.

±ârian _to honour, respect_, Æ, CP: _endow_: _regard, care for, favour,
be merciful to, spare, pardon_, _Æ_; CP. ['_are_']

ârîdan^1 _to ride_, AO 118^33.

âriddan = âhreddan

ârigend mf. _benefactor, benefactress_.

âriht _'aright,' properly_, _LL_.

ârîman _to number, count, enumerate_, _CP_; AO: _relate_. ['_arime_']

ârinnan^3 _to run out, pass away_, #Sol# 479.

ârîsan I. (sv^1) _to 'arise,' get up_, _CP, Æ, MtL_: _rise_, _Mk_:
_spring from, originate_: _spring up, ascend_, _El_. II. = +rîsan I.

ârist = ¯ærist

ârlêas _dishonourable, base, impious, wicked_, Æ, CP: _cruel_, #Jul# 4.
[_Ger._ ehrlos] adv. -lîce Æ.

ârlêasnes f. _wickedness_, BH, #Bo#.

ârlêast f. _disgraceful deed_, #Met#.

ârlic _honourable_: _fitting, agreeable, proper_, AO: _delicious_.

ârlîce adv. I. _honourably, becomingly, graciously, kindly, pleasantly,
mercifully_, CP. II. (N) = ¯ærlîce

ârloc n. _'oarlock,' rowlock_, WW 288^6.

arm = earm

armelu _'harmala,' wild rue_, _Lcd_.

ârmorgen = ¯ærmorgen

arn pret. 3 sg. of iernan.

arnian = earnian

+arnung = +earnung

arod I. _quick, bold, ready_, CP. II. m? _a kind of plant, arum_?

ârod pp. of ârian.

arodlic _quick_. adv. -lîce _quickly_: _vigorously_, Æ, CP.

arodnes f. _spirit, boldness_, CP 41^17.

arodscipe m. _energy, dexterity_, CP.

aron (NG) used as pres. pl. of wesan.

ârsâpe f. _verdigris_. [sâpe]

ârscamu f. _shame, modesty_, #PPs# 68^19.

ârsmið m. _coppersmith_.

ârstæf ¶ m. (often in pl.) _support, assistance, kindness, benefit,
grace_.

art, arð (NG) = eart, pres. 2 sg. of wesan.

ârðegn m. _servant_, BH 378^11.

ârðing n. _a thing of value_, LkR 21^1.

arud == arod

ârung f. _honour, respect, reverence_, AO: _pardon_.

ârunnen = âurnen, pp. of ârinnan.

arwe (rew-, ruw-) f. '_arrow_,' _LL, Chr_.

ârwela ¶ m. _watery realm_, #An# 855. [êar]

âr-weorð, -weorðe _honourable, venerable, revering, pious_, CP. adv.
-weorðe.

ârweorðful _honourable_, Æ (u^2).

±ârweorðian _to honour, reverence, worship, extol_.

ârweorðlic _venerable, honourable_. adv. -lîce _honourably,
reverentially, solemnly, kindly_, _Æ_. ['_arworthly_']

ârweorðnes f. _reverence, honour_, CP.

ârweorðung f. _honour_. #Ps#.

ârwesa _respected_, RB 115^20.

ârwierðe == ârweorð

ârwiððe f. _oar-thong, rowlock_, Æ.

arwunga, arwunge (A) = earwunga

ârwurð, -wyrð == ârweorð

âryddan, -rydran, -rytran _to strip, plunder_, #Gl#, WW.

ârýderian _to blush_, #BRPs# 69^4.

ârýpan _to tear off, strip_, #Rd# 76^7.

ârýð f. _wave of the sea_, #An# 532. [êar]

âsadian _to satiate, surfeit_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

âsæcgan = âsecgan

âsægdnes = onsægednes

âs¯ælan ¶ _to bind, fetter, ensnare_.

âsændan = âsendan

asal, asald (NG) = esol

âsânian _to droop, flag_, #Gu# 1148, LV 57.

âsâwan^7 _to sow, sow with_, Æ.

asca (NG) m. = asce

âscacan = âsceacan

âscâdan = âscêadan

âscæcan = âsceacan

âscæfen pp. of âsceafan.

âsc¯ære = ¯æsc¯ære  [[headword spelled "¯æscære"]]

âscafan = âsceafan

âscamelic _shameful_, #HGl# 500.

âscamian (ea) _to feel shame_, _Ps, Cr_. ['_ashame_']

ascas nap. of æsc.

ascbacen (ax-) _baked on ashes_, GD 86^30.

asce (æ, cs, x) f. _(burnt) 'ash,'_ _Lcd_: _dust (of the ground)_,
_MtL_.

âsceacan^6 (a) _to shake off, remove_, _Mt_: _depart, flee, desert,
forsake_, _Æ_: _shake, brandish_. ['_ashake_']

âscêadan^7 (â) _to separate, hold aloof or asunder, exclude_, CP: _make
clear, cleanse, purify_.

âsceafan (a) _to shave off_, #Lcd#.

âscealian _to peel off_, WW.

âsceamian = âscamian

âscearpan = âscirpan

âscellan = âscillan, âscilian  [[both under "âscilian"]]

âscêofan = âscûfan

âsceon- = onscun-

âsceortian = âscortian

âscêotan^2 _to shoot, shoot out_, Æ, AO: _drop out, fall_, Æ: _lance_
(surgery), ÆL 20^63: _eviscerate_, OEG 46^47.

âsceppan = âscieppan

âsceran = âsciran

âscerian = âscirian

âscerpan (#VPs#) = âscirpan

âscian (âcs-, âhs-, âx-) _to 'ask,' inquire, seek for, demand_, _Æ, KC,
WG_, etc.; CP: _call, summon_, _B, Gen_: (+) _learn by inquiry,
discover, hear of_, #Chr#: (¶) _announce_.

âsciendlic (âx-) _interrogative_, #ÆGr# 260^14.

âscieppan^6 _to make, create_, _Ex_: _appoint, determine, assign_, AO.
['_ashape_']

âscihhan = âscyhhan

ascildan _to protect_, DR.

âscilian _to separate, divide_, v. OEG 1367n.; FM 100.

âscîmian _to shine_, #Lcd# 2·232.

âscînan^1 _to flash or shine forth, beam, radiate, be clear_, GD.

âsciran ¶ _to cut off, cut away_.

âscirian _to cut off, separate, divide, remove_, Æ: _set free, deprive
of_: _arrange, destine_.

âscirigendlic _disjunctive_, #ÆGr# 259^14 (y^2).

âscirpan _to sharpen, make acute_, CP.

âscortian (eo) _to become short, fail_, Æ: _pass away, elapse_.

âscrêadian _to prune, lop_.

âscrencan _to displace, trip up, cause to stumble_, _CP_.
['_aschrench_']

âscrepan^5 _to scrape, clear away_.

âscrincan^3 _to shrink up_.

âscrûdnian (ûtn) _to investigate, examine_.

âscûfan^2 _to drive out, remove, expel, banish_, Æ: _push (away)_, _give
up (to)_.

ascun- = onscun-

±âscung f. _'asking,' questioning, inquiring, question_, _Met, Bo_;
Æ, CP.

âscyhhan _to scare away, reject_, #RPs# 50^13.

âscylfan _to destroy_, GPH 393^49.

âscylian, âscyllan = âscilian

âscyndan _to separate, part (from)_: _drive away (from)_, Æ.

âscyr- = âscir-

âscýran _to make clear_, Æ. [scîr]

âsealcan (#Gen# 2167) = âseolcan

âsêarian _to wither, dry up_, _Lcd_; CP. ['_asear_']

âsêcan _to seek out, select_: _search out, examine, explore_: _seek for,
require, ask_, _PPs_: _search through, penetrate_. ['_aseek_']

âsecgan I. _to say out, express, tell, utter, narrate, explain,
announce_, AO. II. = onsecgan

âsecgendlic _utterable_, Æ.

âsêdan ([¯oe]) _to satiate_, #Gl#. [sæd]

âsegendnes f. _an offering_, #Nar# 24^17.

âsellan _to give up, hand over, deliver_: _expel, banish_.

âsencan _to sink, immerse_, OEG 829.

âsendan _to send away, send off, send, give up_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_asend_']

âsengan (#Jul# 313) = âsecgan

âseolcan^3 _to become slack, remiss, relaxed, weak_, Æ, CP.

âsêon I. sv^5 _to look upon, behold_, HL 16^255. II. sv^1 _to strain_,
#Lcd#.

âseonod _relaxed_, WW 228^25. [seonu]  [[under "seono"]]

âsêoðan^2 _to seethe, boil_, CP: _refine, purify_: _examine_.

âsêowan _to sew_, Cp 421#p# (io).

âsetnes f. _institute, law_, LL.

asettan = onsettan

âsettan _to set, put, place, fix, establish, appoint, set up or in,
erect, build, plant_, _AO, Mt_; Æ: _transport oneself over, cross (the
sea, etc.)_: _take away_, LL 11[12]. sîð _or_ sîðas â. _to perform a
journey, travel_.

âsêðan _to affirm, confirm_, Æ. [sôð]

âsîcan I. sv^1 _to sigh_, #Sc#. II. _to wean_, #CPs# 130^2.

âsiftan _to sift_, #Lcd# 13b.

âsîgan^1 _to sink, sink down, decline, fall down_, _Chr_; CP. ['_asye_']

âsincan^3 _to sink down, fall to pieces_, Æ.

âsingan^3 _to sing out, sing, deliver (a speech)_, _compose
(verse)_, BH.

âsittan^5 _to dwell together, settle_, _El_: _apprehend, fear_: _run
aground_. ût a. _starve out_. ['_asit_']

âslacian _to become slack, decline, diminish_, Æ, CP: _grow tired_:
_make slack, loosen, relax, dissolve_.

âslacigendlic _remissive_, #ÆGr# 228^5.

âslæccan _to slacken, loosen_, WW.

âslæcian = âslacian

âsl¯æpan^7 (â) _to slumber, dream_: _be paralysed_, #Lcd#.

âsl¯æwan _to blunt, weaken, make dull_, OEG 18b, 65.

âslâpan = âsl¯æpan

âslâwian _to become sluggish, be torpid_, CP. [slâw]

âslêan^6 _to strike, beat, cut_, Æ: _erect_: _make way_: _paralyse_.
of â. _strike off, behead_, _MtL_; AO. ['_aslay_']

âslêpen = âslêopen pret. opt. 3 pl. of âslûpan.

âslîdan^1 _to slide, slip, fall_, _Ps_; Æ, CP. ['_aslide_']

âslîding f. _slipping_, GPH 388^62.

âslîtan^1 (ý) _to slit, cleave, cut off, destroy_, CP.

âslûpan^2 _to slip off, escape, disappear_ (of), _Ps_. ['_aslip_']

âslýtan = âslîtan

âsmêagan _to consider, examine, investigate, devise, elicit, treat of,
think_, Æ: _look for, demand_.

âsmêagung f. _scrutiny, consideration_.

âsmêan = âsmêagan

±âsmir-ian, -wan _to smear, anoint_.

âsmiðian _to do smith's work, fashion, forge, fabricate_, Æ.

âsmorian _to smother, strangle_, AO, CP.

âsmorung f. _choking, suffocation_, #Lcd# 18a.

âsmûgan = âsmêagan

âsn¯æsan (â^2) _to spit, impale, stab_, _LL_ 68, 36. ['_asnese_']

asnîðan^1 _to cut off_, #Lcd#.

âsoden (WW 20^44) pp. of âsêoðan.

âsolcen (pp. of âseolcan) _sluggish, idle, indifferent, dissolute_, Æ.

âsolcennes f. _sleepiness, sloth, laziness_, _W_; Æ. ['_aswolkeness_']

âsolian _to become dirty_, A 2·374.

âspanan^6 _to allure, seduce, persuade, urge, insinuate_, AO.

âspannan^7 _to unbind, unclasp_, GD 214^24.

âsparian _to preserve_, GD 159^24.

âspeaft (JnL 9^6) = âspeoft

âspêdan _to survive, escape_, #An# 1628.

âspelian _to be substitute for, represent, take the place of_, LL, RB.
â. fram _be exempt from_.

âspendan _to spend (money)_, _expend, distribute, squander, consume_,
_AO_; Æ. ['_aspend_']

âspeoft pret. 3 sg. _spit out_, JnR 9^6. [v. speoft]

âsperian = âspyrian

aspide m. _asp, adder, serpent, viper_, _Ps_; Æ. ['_aspide_']

âspillan _to destroy_, JnL 12^10.

âspinnan^3 _to spin_, WW.

âspirian = âspyrian

âspîwan^1 (ý) _to spew up, vomit_, Æ, CP.

âspl¯ætan ?_to split_. v. ES 49·156.

âspornan _to cast down_, #EPs# 145^7. [spurnan]

âsprêadan _to stretch out, extend_, #EPs# 35^11.

âsprecan _to speak out, speak_, #PPs#.

âsprengan _to cause to spring, fling out_, ÆL 8^213.

âsprettan = âspryttan

âsprindlad _ripped up_, #Lcd# 80b.

âspringan^3 (y) _to spring up or forth, break forth, spread_, _Æ_; AO:
_arise, originate, be born_, _Æ_: _dwindle, diminish, fail, cease_.
âsprungen _dead_. ['_aspring_']

âspringung f. _failing_, #VPs# 141^4.

âspritan = âspryttan

âsproten pp. of âsprûtan.

â-sprungennes, -sprungnes f. _failing, exhaustion, death_: _eclipse_.

âsprûtan^2 (= êo) _to sprout forth_, #PPs# 140^9.

âspryngan = âspringan

âspryttan^1 (e, i) _to sprout out, bring forth_, Æ.

âspylian _to wash oneself_, #Bo# 115^7.

âspyrgend m. _tracker, investigator_, VHy.

âspyrging f. '_adinventio_,' WW 513^15.

âspyrian (i) _to track, trace out, investigate, explore, discover_.

âspýwan = âspîwan

assa m. _he-ass_, _Mt, Jn, Æ_; CP. ['_ass_']

assen f. _she-ass_.

assmyre f. _she-ass_, Æ.

âst f. _kiln_, _WW_ 185^30; A 9·265. ['_oast_']

âst¯ægan _to go up, embark_, MkR 6^32.

âst¯ælan _to lay to one's charge_, LL (264^15).

âst¯ænan^1 _to adorn with precious stones_.

âstærfan (_MtR_) = âstyrfan

âstandan^6 _to stand up, stand forth, rise up, arise_, _B_; Æ:
_continue, endure_, _Lk_; CP. ['_astand_']

âstandennes f. _perseverance_, ÆL 23b^272: _existence, subsistence_.

âstêapan = âstýpan

âstellan I. _to set forth, set, put, afford, supply, display, appoint_,
AO, CP: _set up, establish, confirm, institute, ordain, undertake,
start_, _AO_; Æ: _undergo_, Æ. II. _to fly off, rush_.

âstemnian _to build_.

âstemped _engraved, stamped_, WW 203^27.

âstencan _to scatter_, GD 42^33.

âstêopan = âstýpan

âsteorfan^3 _to die_, MH 62^27.

âstêp- = âstýp-

âsterian = âstyrian

asterion _'asterion,' pellitory_, _Lcd_ 1·164.

âstîfian _to become stiff_, Æ.

âstîfician = âstýfecian

âstîgan^1 _to proceed, go_, Æ: (usu. w. ûp, niðer, _etc._) _rise, mount,
ascend, descend_, _Jn_; Æ, CP: _be puffed up_, AO 264^8. ['_astye_']

âstîgend m. _rider_.

âstigian _to ascend, mount_.

âstîgnes f. _ascent_, #EPs# 103^4.

âstihtan _to determine on, decree_, #Chr# 998.

âstihting (OEG) = âtihting  [[redirected to "âtyhting"]]

âstillian _to still, quiet_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

âstingan^3 _to bore out, pierce out_, #Chr#: _stab_.

âstintan = âstyntan

âstirian = âstyrian

âstîðian _to become hard, dry tip, wither_: _grow up, come of age_, TC
203^20.

âstondnes = âstandennes

âstr¯ælian _to cast forth_, #RPs# 75^9.

âstreccan _to stretch out, stretch forth, extend, lay low_, _Æ_:
_prostrate oneself, bow down_, CP. ['_astretch_']

âstregdan _to sprinkle_.

âstregdnes? f. _sprinkling_, DR.

âstrenged _(made strong), malleable_, WW.

âstrîenan (êo, ý) _to beget_.

âstrogden pp. of âstregdan.

âstrowenes f. _length_, #HGl# 443.

âstrýnan = âstrîenan

âstundian _to take upon oneself_, Æ.

âstýfecian _to suppress, eradicate_, CP.

âstyllan = âstellan

âstyltan _to be astonished_, LkLR.

âstyntan (i) _to blunt, repress, restrain, stop, overcome_, _Gl_.
['_astint_']

âstýpan (ê, êa, êo) _to deprive, bereave_, GD. âstýpte _orphans_.
[stêop]

  [[Printed as shown, but reference may be to "stêop-" as word
  element.]]

âstýp(ed)nes (ê^2) f. _privation, bereavement_.

âstýran _to guide, control_, AS 9^16.

âstyrfan (æ, e) _to kill, destroy_, _Cr, Mt_ (e). ['_asterve_']

âstyrian _to stir up, excite, move, move forward, raise_, _Jn, Mk_; Æ:
_be roused, become angry_, Æ. âstyred weorðan _be or become anxious_, Æ.
['_astir_']

âstyriendlic v. un-â.  [[under "unâstyriende"]]

âstyrigend m. '_ventilator_,' GPH 393^78.

âstyrred _starry_, #Sc#.

âstyrung f. _motion_, #Lcd#.

â-sûcan^2 -sûgan _to suck, suck out, drain_.

â-sundran, -sundron = onsundran

âsundrian = âsyndrian  [[under "âsyndran"]]

âsûrian _to be or become sour_, WW.

âsw¯æman _to roam, wander about_: _pine, grieve_, Æ.

âsw¯ærn- = âswarn-

âsw¯ætan _to burst out in perspiration_, MH 20^12.

âswâmian _to die away_, #Gen# 376: _cease_.

âswâpan^7 (but pp. âswôpen) _to sweep away, remove, clean_, CP.

âswârcan _to languish_, #LPs# 38^12.

âswârcian _to confound_, #BSPs# 70^24.

âswârnian _to be confounded_, #Ps#.

âswârnung f. _shame, confusion_, #LPs# 43^16.

âswaðian _to investigate_, OEG 5^11.

âsweartian _to turn livid, become ashy or black_, CP.

âswebban ¶ _to lull, soothe, set at rest_: _put to death, destroy_,
_Jud_. ['_asweve_']

âswellan^3 _to swell_, CP.

âsweltan^3 _to die_, #Chr#.

âswencan _to afflict_, DR.

âswengan _to swing off, shake off, cast forth_.

âsweorcan^3 _to droop_, Æ.

âsweorfan^3 _to file off, polish_, GPH.

âswêpa = ¯æsw¯æpe

âswerian^6 _to swear_, #PPs#.

âswîcan^1 _to desert, abandon, betray, deceive_, _Mt_: _offend,
irritate, provoke_. ['_aswike_']

±âswician _to offend_.

âswicung f. _scandal, offence_.

âswîfan^1 _to wander, stray_, WW.

âswind = ¯æswind

âswindan^3 _to become weak, shrink, fade away, perish, decay, dissolve_,
_Bo_; Æ, CP. ['_aswind_']

âswingan^3 _to scourge_, DR.

âswôgan^7 _to cover over, choke_, CP 411^17.

âsworettan _to sigh, grieve_, GD.

âswornian (NC 271) = âswarnian  [[headword spelled "âswârnian"]]

âswundennes f. _idleness_, BH 160^25.

âsynderlic _remote_, OEG 2514.

±âsynd-ran, -rian _to separate, divide, disjoin, sever_, CP, Æ:
_distinguish, except_. ['_asunder_']

âsyndrung f. _division_, WW.

at == æt

ât¯æfran (CP 467^19) = âtîefran

ât¯æsan _to wear out, injure, strike, smite_, Æ: _wound_, CP 296^18.

atâwian = ætîewan

âte (æ) f. '_oats_,' _Lcd_: _wild oats, tares_, _Gl, WW_.

âteallan = âtellan

âtêfran = âtîefran

ategâr = ætgâr  [[under "ætg¯ære"]]

atel == atol

âtellan _to reckon up, count_, _Bo_; AO. â. wið _balance against_:
_tell, enumerate_, CP: _explain, interpret_. ['_atell_']

âtemian _to tame, subdue, render quiet_, CP.

âtendan _to set on fire, kindle, inflame_, _Chr_: _trouble, perplex_, A
8·312^48. ['_atend_']

âtending f. _incentive_, #Sc# 221^17.

âtêon^2 _to draw up, out, off or from, remove, pull out, lead out,
draw_, _B, BH_; AO, CP. ûp â. _draw up, move away_: _protract_, Æ:
_move, journey, roam_: _deal with, dispose of, apply, use_, _Mt_; Æ, CP.
['_atee_']

âtêorian _to fail, become exhausted, weary, cease_, _Ps_; Æ: _be
defective_, #ÆGr#. ['_atire_']

âtêori(g)endlic _transitory, perishable_, Æ: _failing_: _defective_,
#ÆGr#.

âtêorodnes f. _cessation, exhaustion_, HL 3^495; #BPs# 118^53.

âtêorung f. _failing, weariness_, Æ.

âtêowan = ôðîewan  [[headword spelled "oðîewan"]]

âter == âtor

âtêran^4 _to tear away_, CP 359^20.

âteriendlic = âteoriendlic  [[headword spelled "âtêoriendlic"]]

âterima (êtr-) _oat-bran_, #Lcd# 3·292´.

âtertânum dp. _with poisoned twigs (or_? -tearum _with poison drops)_ B
1460.

âteshwôn adv. _at all_, CM 987. [âwiht]

athêd (#Gl#) = æthýd

âtîdrian _to grow weak_, GD 59^26 (ydd).

âtîefran (¯æ, ê, î, ý) _to draw, depict_, CP.

atîewan = ôðîewan  [[headword spelled "oðîewan"]]

âtiht- = âtyht-

âtillan _to touch, reach_.

âtimbr-an, -ian _to erect, build_, AO, CP.

âtimplian _to provide with spikes_, NC 271.

âtîwan = ôðîewan  [[headword spelled "oðîewan"]]

âtlêag m. _oat-field_?, EC 448^9.

atol I. _dire, terrible, ugly, deformed, repulsive, unchaste_, _B_.
['_atel_'] II. ¶ n. _horror, evil_.

atolic, atollic _dire, terrible, deformed, repulsive_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

atoliende _disfiguring_, WW 220^26.

âtor, ât(to)r, (¯æ) n. _poison, venom_, _Lcd_; AO, CP: _gall_, _Gl_.
['_atter_']

âtorb¯ære _poisonous_, ÆH 1·72^22.

âtorberende _poisonous, venomous_.

âtorcoppe f. _spider_, _Lcd_. ['_attercop_']

âtorcræft (âttor-) m. _art of poisoning_, W.

âtorcyn (¯æ) n. _poison_, #Sol# 219.

âtordrinca m. _poisonous draught_, MH.

âtorgebl¯æd n. _swelling caused by poison_, #Lcd# 162b.

âtorlâðe f. _plant used as antidote to poison, betonica_? _Lcd, WW_.
['_atterlothe_']

âtorlic _poison-like, bitter_, _WW_. ['_atterlich_']

âtorsceaða ¶ m. _poisonous enemy_.

âtorspere n. _poisoned spear_, #Rd# 18^9.

âtorðigen (âtt-) f. _taking of poison_, #Lcd# 1·4^5.

âtr = âtor

âtrahtnian _to treat, discuss_.

âtredan^5 _to extract, extort_, LL.

âtreddan _to search out, examine, investigate_, #PPs#.

âtrendlian _to roll_, _Met_ 5^17. [v. '_trendle_']

âtres gs. of âtor.

atrum n. _ink_, A 13·28^15. [_L._ atramentum]

atter, attor == âtor

attres gs. of attor, âtor.  [[under "atter"]]

attrum = atrum

atul = atol

âtur = âtor

âtwêonian _to cause doubt_, A 8·333^6.

âtyddrian = âtîdrian

âtýdran _to beget, create_, #El# 1279. [tûdor]

âtýfran = âtîefran

âtyhtan (i) _to entice, allure, incite_: _be attentive_: _produce_, #Rd#
51^3: _stretch, extend, turn_.

âtyhting (i) f. _intention, aim_: _instigation_, OEG 2^304.

âtymbran = âtimbran

âtýnan I. _to shut off, exclude_. [tûn] II. = ontýnan

âtyndan = âtendan

âtýrian = âtêorian

atýwan = oðîewan

âð m. '_oath_,' _B, Mt_; AO.

âð- = ôð-

aðamans m. _adamant_, CP 271^2. [_L._]

âðbryce m. _perjury_, W 164^7.

âðecgan _to take food, consume_?: _oppress_? (Tupper) #Rd# 1^2,7.

âðegehât = âðgehât

âðegen _distended_, WW.

âðencan _to think out, devise, contrive, invent_, AO: _intend_.

âðenenes f. _extension_, VHy.

â-ðennan, -ðenian _to stretch out, extend, draw out, expand_, AO: _apply
(the mind)_ CP: _prostrate_.

âðenung f. _extension, distension_.

âðêodan = âðîedan

âðêostrian (ê, îe, î) _to become dark, obscured, eclipsed_, _Bo_; CP,
#VPs#. ['_athester_']

âðer = âhwæðer

âðerscan _to thresh out_, ÆL 31^1217.

âðêstrian = âðêostrian

âðêwan = âðýwan

âðexe f. _lizard_, OET.

âðfultum m. _confirmation (confirmers) of an oath_, LL.

âðgehât (âðe-) n. _promise on oath, oath_, WW.

âðiddan _to thrust, push_, OEG 50^3.

âðîedan _to separate_, CP.

âðierran _to clean_, CP.

âðîestrian (CP) = âðêostrian

âðindan^3 _to swell, puff up, inflate, increase_, CP: _melt, pass away_.
(cp. ðindan)

âðindung f. _swelling_, #Lcd# 93a.

â-ðîstrian, -ðisðrigan (CP) = âðêostrian

âðl (#VPs#) = âdl

âðloga m. _perjurer_, #Cr# 165.

âðol = âdl

âðollan _to hold out, endure, suffer_, Æ.

âðolware mp. _citizens_, #GnE# 201.

âðor = âhwæðer

âðrâcian _to dread_: _frighten_.

âðr¯æstan _to twist out, wrest out_, #Gl#.

âðrâwan^7 _to curl, twist, twine_, Æ.

âðrêatian _to weary, be irksome_: _force away_, CP 293^10.

âðrêotan^2 (pers. and impers.) _to tire of, weary, be tiresome to,
displease, disgust_, Æ, AO, CP.

âðrescan = âðerscan

âðrîetan _to weary_, Æ, AO (ý); #Bo#.

âðringan^3 _to crowd or press out_: _rush forth, break out_. ût â.
_emboss_.

âðrîstian _to be bold, presume_, GD 70^30.

âðrotennes f. _wearisomeness_, WW 409^22.

âðrotsum _irksome_, WW 510^12.

âðrôwian _to suffer_, #Lcd# 68b.

âðroxen pp. of âðerscan.

âðrunten (pp. of *âðrintan) _swollen_, #Rd# 38^2. (or ? aðrûten)

âðrûten pp. (of *âðrûtan) _swollen_, #Lcd#.

âðryccan _to press, oppress_.

âðrýn _to rob_? _drive out_? #Gl#, (ES 43·331).

â-ðrysemian, -ðrysman (_AO_) _to suffocate, smother_. ['_athrysm_']

âðrytnes f. _weariness_.

âðstæf m. _oath_, #CPs# 104^9.

âðswara m? = âðswaru

âðswaring = âðswerung

âðswaru f. _oath-swearing, oath_, Æ.

âðswerian? _to vow with an oath_, WW 387^9.

âðswerung f. _oath-swearing_, #Chr, RSPs# 104^9.

âðswyrd (eo) n. _oath-swearing_, #EPs# 104^9 (¯æ^1); B 2064.

âðum m. _son-in-law_, _Æ_; AO: _brother-in-law_. ['_odam_']

âðumswerian mp. _son-in-law and father-in-law_, B 84.

âðundennes f. _swelling, tumour_, #Lcd#: _contumacy_, WW 87^17.

âðw¯ænan _to diminish, soften_, #Lcd#.

âðwêan^6 _to wash, wash off, cleanse, baptize, anoint_, Æ, CP.

âðwedd n. _promise on oath_, WW 115^16.

âðweran^4 _to stir up, churn_, #Lcd#.

âðwînan _to vanish_, NC 338.

âðwîtan^1 _to disappoint_, #SPs# 131^11.

âðwyrðe _worthy of credit_. v. LL 2·376.

âðýan = âðýwan

âðylgian _to bear up_, #ARSPs#.

âðýn = âðýwan

âðynnian (i) _to make thin_, DHy 8^10.

âðýstrian (Æ) = âðîestrian

âðýtan I. § _to sound, blow (a horn)_. II. _to expel_, WW 19^12.

âðýwan _to drive away_, AO: _press out or into, squeeze out_.

âuht = âwiht

âuðer = âhwæðer

âw = ¯æ

âwa = â

âwacan^6 (on-) _to awake_, _Æ_: _arise, originate, spring forth, be
born_. ['_awake(n)_']

âwacian _to awake_, Æ.

âwâcian _to grow weak, decline, fall, belittle_, Æ, CP: _fall away,
lapse, desist from, abstain_, Æ.

âwacnian = âwæcnian

âwæc- = âwec-

âw¯æcan _to weaken, weary_.

âwæc-nian, -nan (on-; a, e) _to awaken, revive_, Æ: _arise, originate,
spring from_, _AO_. ['_awake(n)_']

âw¯ægan _to deceive_: _destroy, annul, make nugatory_, Æ.

âw¯ælan _to roll, roll from_: _harass, afflict_, NG.

âwæltan = âwyltan

âwæmmian = âwemman

âwænd- = âwend-, onwend-

âwænian = âwenian  [[under "âwennan"]]

âwærd pp. of âwierdan.

âwærged = âwierged

âwærian _to avoid_, DR 39^13.

âwæscan = âwascan

âw¯æstan = âwêstan

âwandian _to fear, hesitate_, #ÆGr# 162^2.

âwanian _to diminish, lessen_.

âwannian _to become livid or black and blue_, GD 20^32 (v. NC 332).

âwansian _to diminish_, KC 4·243^6.

âwâr = âhw¯ær

âwârnian (#APs#) = âswârnian

  [[Entry before author's correction:
  âwârnian _to be confounded_, #SPs#.]]

âwascan^6 (æ) _to wash, bathe, immerse_, #Lcd#.

âweallan^7 _to well up, flow out, break forth, issue, swarm_, CP: _be
hot, burn_.

âweardian _to guard, defend_.

âweaxan^6 _to grow, grow up, arise, come forth_, CP.

âweb = ôweb

âwec- = âwæc-

âweccan _to awake, rouse, incite, excite_, _Mk, Lk_; Æ, CP: _raise up,
beget_. ['_awecche_']

âwecenes (æ) f. _incitement_, GD 199^7.

âwecgan _to undermine, shake, move_, Æ.

âwêdan _to be or become mad, rage_, Æ; _AO_. ['_awede_'; wôd]

âwefan^5 _to weave, weave together_, Æ.

âweg (= on-) _'away,' forth, out_, _Chr, Mt_; CP.

âwegan^5 _to lift up, carry away_: _weigh, weigh out_, _Æ_: _estimate,
consider_. ['_aweigh_']

âwegâworpnes f. _abortion_, LL (154^34).

âwegcuman^4 _to escape_, Æ.

âwegêade _went away_, _JnL_ 4^50 [v. '_away_'; êode]

âwegflêon^2 _to fly or flee away_, OEG 2169.

âweggân _to go away_, BH 326^10.

âweggewîtan^1 _to depart_, AO 74^26.

âweggewitenes f. _departure_, Æ: _aberration (of mind)_, #JPs# 115^11.

âwehtnes f. _arousing_, BH 422^20.

awel m. _hook, fork_, #Gl#.

âwellan = âwyllan

âwemman _to disfigure, corrupt_.

âwemmendnes f. _corruption_.

âwênan _to consider_.

âwendan (= on-) _to avert, turn aside, remove, upset_, _Ps_: _change,
exchange, alter, pervert_, _Æ_; CP: _translate_, Æ, CP: _turn from, go,
depart_, _Ps_; AO: _return_: _subdue_. ['_awend_']

âwendedlic = âwendendlic

âwendednes f. _change, alteration_, Æ.

âwendendlic _that can be changed, changeable_, Æ.

âwendendlîcnes f. _mutability_, Æ.

âwendennes f. _change_, OEG 191.

âwending f. _subversion, change_, ES 39·322.

âwen-nan, -ian _to disaccustom, wean_.

âwêodian _to root out, extirpate_.

âweorpan^3 _to throw, throw away, cast down, cast out, cast aside,
degrade, depose_, _Mt_; Æ, AO, CP. âworpen _divorced, rejected,
destroyed, apostate_. of, ût â. _to throw out_. ['_awarp_']

âweorpnes = âworpennes

âweorðan^3 _to pass away, vanish, become worthless_, _Mt_; (NG) =
+weorðan. ['_aworth_']

âweosung f. '_subsistentia_,' WW 516^4.

âwer = âhw¯ær

âwerdan = âwierdan

âwerde (æ^2) m. _worthless fellow_, WW 111^29.

âwerg- = âwierg-, âweri-

âwerian I. _to defend_, AO: _hinder, restrain_, #Chr#: _protect, cover,
surround, enclose_: _ward off from oneself, spurn from oneself_. II. _to
wear, wear out (clothes)_, RB.

âwerpan = âweorpan

âwescnes (#VPs#) = ¯æwiscnes

âwêstan _to lay waste, ravage, destroy_, _AO_; Æ. ['_awest_']

âwêst(ed)nes f. _desolation, destruction_.

âwêstend m. _devastator_, W 200^19.

âwexen = âweaxen pp. of âweaxan.

+âwian (AS 42^9) = +êawian

âwîdlian _to profane, defile_.

âwierdan (e, y) _to spoil, injure, hurt, corrupt, seduce, destroy,
kill_, CP.

âwierding (y) f. _corruption, blemish_, #HGl# 421^57.

âwierg-an, -ian (æ, e, i, y) I. _to curse, damn, denounce, outlaw_, _Æ,
Mt, CP_; VPs. sê âwier(ge)da _fiend, devil_. ['_awarie_'] II. = âwyrgan

âwiht I. n. _'aught,' anything, something_, _Ps_. II. adv. _at all, by
any means_. tô âhte _at all_. III. _good, of value_, Æ.

âwildian _to become wild_, Æ, LL.

âwillan = âwyllan

âwille (WW) = ânwille II.

âwindan^3 _to wind, bend, plait_: _slip from, withdraw, escape_, CP:
_become relaxed_? W 148^3.

âwindwian (y) _to winnow, blow away, disperse_, #Ps#.

âwinnan^3 _to labour, strive_, _JnL_: _gain, overcome, endure_, _Da_.
['_awin_']

âwirgan = I. âwyrgan. II. âwyrgian

âwirgnes = âwyrgednes

âwisc- = ¯æwisc-

âwisnian _to become dry, wither_.

âwistlian _to hiss_, W 147^37. [hwistlian]

âwlacian _to be or become lukewarm_.

âwl¯ætan _to befoul, make loathsome, defile_, Æ.

âwlancian _to exult, to be proud_, OEG 1159.

âwlencan _to make proud, enrich_, DR 59^1.

âwlyspian _to 'lisp,'_ _MLN_ 4·279 (NC 338).

âwo = â (âwa)

âwoffian _to become proud, insolent_: _rave, be delirious, insane_, Æ.

âwôgian _to woo_, Æ.

âwôh _(crookedly), wrongfully, unjustly_, LL. [= on wôh]

âwol = âwel

âwolfigan = âwoffian

âwonian (DR) = âwanian

âwor = âfor

âwordennes f. _degeneration_, WW 87^21.

âworpednes (#EPs# 21^7) = âworpennes

âworpenlic _worthy of condemnation_, CP. adv. -lîce _vilely_.

â-worpennes, -worpnes f. _rejection, what is cast away_: _exposure
(of children)_.

âwr¯ænan _to make wanton_, #Lcd# 54b.

âwr¯æstan _to wrest from, extort_, WW 397^37.

âwrecan^5 _to thrust out, drive away_: _strike, pierce_: _utter, sing,
relate, recite_: _punish, avenge_, _LL, ChrL_. ['_awreak_']

âwreccan _to arouse, awake_, Æ.

âwregennes = onwrigenes  [[under "onwrigennes"]]

âwrêon^1,2 (= on-) _to disclose, discover, reveal_: _cover_, NG.

âwreðian _to support, uphold_, CP.

âwrîdian _to originate, spring from_.

âwrigenes = onwrigennes

âwringan^3 _to wring, squeeze out_, Æ.

âwrit n. _a writing_.

âwrîtan^1 _to write, write down, describe, compose_, _CP_; Æ, AO, #Chr#:
_mark, inscribe, draw, carve, copy_. ['_awrite_']

âwrîðan^1 I. _to turn, wind, bind up, bind, wreathe_. II. = onwrîðan

awrygenes = onwrigenes  [[under "onwrigennes"]]

âwðer, âwðor = âhwæðer

âwuht = âwiht

âwul = âwel

âwuldrian _to glorify_ (N).

âwundrian _to wonder, wonder at, admire_.

âwunian _to remain, continue_, BH.

âwunigende ptc. _continual_.

âwurt-walian, -warian = âwyrtwalian

âwurðan = âweorðan

âwyht = âwiht

âwylian _to roll_, Æ.

âwyllan _to bring into commotion, boil_, Æ.

âwylm = ¯æwielm

âwyltan, âwylwan _to roll, roll away_, Æ: _harass_, DR (æ).

âwyndwian = âwindwian

âwyrcan _to do_.

âwyrd- (Æ) = âwierd-

âwyrdla = æfwyrdla

âwyrdnes _hurt, harm, destruction_, Æ: _defilement_.

âwyrg- = âwierg-

âwyrgan (i, ie) _to strangle, suffocate_, _AO_ (i), Æ. ['_aworry_']

âwyrgedlic, âwyrgendlic _detestable, shameful, abominable_.

âwyrgednes f. _wickedness_, Æ: _curse, cursing_. [wearg]

âwyrgodnes = âwyrgednes

âwyrigende _accursed_, Æ.

âwyrigung f. _a curse_, Æ.

âwyrn (#Men# 101) = âhwærgen  [[headword spelled "âhw¯ærgen"]]

âwyrpan (= ie) _to recover (from illness)_, ÆH 1·534^28.

âwyrtlian = âwyrtwalian

âwyrtwalian _to root out_, CP.

âwyrðung f. _stain, aspersion_, #HGl# 421.

ax- = asc-, ox-

âx- = âsc-

axe = æcs

âýdan (OEG 8^108) = âîdan

âýdlian = âîdlian

âyldan _to delay_, GD 21^22. [ieldan]

âyrnan = âiernan

âýtan _to drive out_. [ût]

âyttan = âettan




=B=


bâ nafn. and am. of bêgen _both_.

bac- v. bæc.

bacan^6 _to 'bake,'_ Æ.

bacas nap. of bæc II.

bacca m. _ridge_, BC (bacce f. Mdf).

bacu nap. of bæc I.

bâd I. f. _forced contribution, impost, pledge_, LL: _expectation_.
[bîdan] II. (±) pret. 3 sg. of bîdan.

-bâdere v. nîed-b.

bâdian _to take a pledge or fine_, LL.

bæ- = ba-, be-, bea-

bæc I. n. '_back_,' _Bo, MtL, Ps_; CP. on b. _backwards, behind,
'aback.' _on b. settan, l¯ætan _to neglect_. ofer b. _backwards, back_.
under b. _behind, backwards, back_. ofer b. bûgan _to turn back, flee_.
cl¯æne b. habban _to be straightforward, honest_, LL 128[5]. II. mfn.
_beck, brook_. v. ES 29·411.

bæcbord n. _left side of a ship, larboard_, AO.

bæce = bæc II.

b¯æce = bêce

b¯æcen- = bêacen-

bæcere I. m. '_baker_,' _Æ_. II. = bæzere

bæcering m. _gridiron_, WW.

bæcern n. _bakery, bakehouse_, Æ.

bæcestre fm. _baker_, Æ. ['_baxter_']

bæceð, bæcð, pres. 3 sg. of bacan.

bæcistre = bæcestre

bæcling, bæclinga (on) adv. _backwards, behind_. on b. gewend _having
one's back turned_, Æ.

bæcslitol adj. _backbiting_, W 72^16.

bæcðearm m. _rectum_; pl. _bowels, entrails_, Æ.

+bæcu np. _back parts_, #LPs#.

bæd I. pret. 3 sg. of biddan. II. = bed

b¯ædan _to urge on, impel_, CP: _solicit, require_: _afflict, oppress_.

bædan _to defile_, #EPs# 78^1.

bædd == bedd

bæddæg '_epiphania_,' DR.

b¯æddel m. _effeminate person, hermaphrodite_, WW. [v. '_bad_']

bæddryda = bedrida

bædend m. _inciter_, WW.

b¯ædewêg n. _drinking vessel_. [w¯æge]

b¯ædling m. _effeminate or impure male person_, _WW_. ['_badling_']

b¯ædon pret. pl. of biddan.

bædryda = bedrida

bædzere = bæzere

bæfta, bæftan (_Mt_; Æ) = beæftan

bæftansittende _idle_, #ÆGr# 52^2.

-bæftian (ea^1, a^2) v. hand-b.

b¯æg = bêag

b¯ægen = bêgen

b¯æh = bêag

b¯æl n. _fire, flame_, _B_: _funeral pyre, bonfire_. ['_bale_']

b¯ælblys, -blyse, -blæse ¶ f. _blaze of a fire, funereal blaze_.

bælc I. ¶ m. _pride, arrogance_. II. m. _covering, cloud_? #Ex# 73.

bælcan ¶ _to cry out_.

+bælcan _to root up_, #CPs# 79^14.

bældan = bieldan

bældo (CP), bældu = bieldo

b¯ælegsa m. _terror of fire_, #Ex# 121.

b¯ælfýr n. _'bale-fire,' funeral or sacrificial fire_, _B_.

bælg, bælig (NG) == belg

b¯ælstede m. _place of a funeral pile_, B 3097.

b¯æl-ðracu f. (ds. -ðræce) _violence of fire_, #Ph# 270.

b¯ælwudu m. _wood for a funeral pile_, B 3112.

b¯ælwylm m. _flames of a funeral-fire_, #Jul# 336.

b¯æm = bâm (v. bêgen)

bænd == bend

+b¯æne? _bones_, NC 292.

b¯ænen _made of bone_, Æ.

bær I. gsmn. bares _'bare,' uncovered_, _Bo_: _naked, unclothed_, _Gen_.
II. pret. 3 sg. of beran.

b¯ær I. f. '_bier_,' _El_; Æ: _handbarrow, litter, bed_, _BH, JnR_.
[beran] II. _a pasture_? KC (BT). III. = bâr (AB 14·233).

+b¯æran _to behave, conduct oneself_, _CP_: _fare_, B 2824: '_exultare_,'
#PPs#. ['_i-bere_']

bærbær _barbarous_, #EPs# 113^1.

b¯ærdisc m. _tray_, WW. [beran]

bære = bere pres. 1 sing. of beran.

bære- = bere-

-b¯ære suffix (from beran); forms derivatives from substantives, as in
cwealmb¯ære. [_Ger._ -bar]

b¯ære == b¯ær

+b¯ære n. _manner, behaviour_, _El_: _gesture, cry_: _action_.
['_i-bere_'; beran]

bærfôt _barefoot_.

bærhtm (A) = bearhtm

bærlic I. adj. _of barley_, KC 6·79^10. II. _open, clear, public_. adv.
-lîce.

b¯ærmann m. _bearer, porter_, _Æ_. ['_berman_']

bærn = bereærn

±bærnan (e) _to cause to burn, kindle, burn, consume_, _Sol_; AO, #VPs#.
[v. '_burn_']

bærnelâc (e) n. _burnt-offering_, #PPs#.

+b¯ærnes f. _bearing, manner_, WW 529^13.

bærnett (y^2) n. _burning, burn, cautery_, Æ: _arson_, LL.

bærning f. _burning_: _burnt offering_, #BPs# 50^18.

bærnîsen n. _branding-iron_, OEG 7^113.

bærnnes, bærnes f. _burning_.

bæro = bearu

b¯æron pret. pl. of beran.

bærs m. _a fish, perch_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ barsch]

+b¯ærscipe (LkL) = +bêorscipe

bærst pret. 3 sg. of berstan.

bærstl- = brastl-

bærsynnig m. _notoriously wicked person, publican_, NG.

+b¯æru v. +b¯ære.

bærwe = bearwe

bæst mn.? _inner bark of trees, 'bast,'_ _Æ, OET_.

bæsten _made of bast_.

bæstere = bæzere

b¯ætan I. _to bait, hunt, worry_, Æ. [v. '_bait_']: (BT) _make fast_?
(Sedgef. = III). II. _to beat against the wind_? #Bo# 144^31. [_ON._
beita] III. _to furnish with a bit or bridle, saddle, curb_.

+b¯æte, +b¯ætel n. _bit, bridle_, pl. _trappings_, BH.

bætera, bættra = betera

b¯ætung (ê) f. _beating_ (_against the wind_?) (BT), _cable_ (Sedgef.),
#Bo# 144^31.

bæð n. nap. baðu _'bath,' action of bathing_, _Lcd_: _laver_, _AO_:
_liquid in which one bathes, medicinal spring_, _BH, KC_. ganotes b.
_gannet's bath_ (i.e. the sea), B.

bæðcere m. _bather_.

bæðere = bæzere

bæðern n. _bath-house_, NC 272.

bæðfæt n. _bathing-tub_, LL 455[17].

bæðhûs n. _bathing-place_, Æ.

bæðian = baðian

bæðsealf f. _bathing-salve_, #Lcd#.

bæðstede m., bæðstôw f. _bathing-place_, WW.

bæðweg ¶ m. _sea_.

bæzere m. _baptiser, baptist_. [= _L._ baptista]

bal- = beal-

balc, balca m. _bank, ridge_, _Bo, WW_. ['_balk_']

ballîce (NG) = bealdlîce

bal-sam, -samum n. _'balsam,' balm_, _BH_.

balsmêðe f. _bergamot_, #Lcd# 3·90^23.

balsminte f. _balsam-mint, water-mint_, WW 136^6.

balzam n., balzame f. = balsam

bâm dmfn. of bêgen.

+ban = +bann

±bân n. _'bone,' tusk_, _Jn, Æ, Gl_; AO, CP: _the bone of a limb_.

bana (o) m. _killer, slayer, murderer_, _B_; #Chr#: _the devil_: (f.)
_murderess_, A 10·155. ['_bane_']

bânbeorge f. _leg-armour, greaves_, WW.

bânbryce m. _fracture of a bone_, #Lcd#.

bâncofa ¶ m. _the bodily frame_.

ban-coða m., -coðu f. _baneful disease_.

band pret. 3 sg. of bindan.

bânece _in pain in the thigh_, #Lcd#.

bân-fæt ¶ n. nap. -fatu _body, corpse_.

bânfâg _adorned with bonework_ (deer antlers?), B 781.

bangâr (o) m. _murdering spear_, B 2031.

bângeberg n. = bânbeorge

bângebrec n. _fracture of a bone_, #An# 1439.

bânhelm m. _helmet, shield_? #Fin# 30 (v. also bârhelm).

bânhring ¶ m. _vertebra, joint_.

bânhûs ¶ n. _body, chest, breast_. bânhûses weard _the mind_, #Ex# 523.

bânlêas _boneless_, #Rd# 46^3.

bânloca ¶ m. _joint, limb_.

+bann n. _proclamation, summons, command_, Æ, CP: _indiction (cycle of
15 years)_.

±bannan^7 _to summon, command, proclaim_. b. ût _call out_, #Chr#.

bannend m. _summoner_, #Gl#.

+banngêar (-gêr) n. _indiction, year of the indiction_.

bannuc m. _a sort of cake_, OEG.

bânrift (y) n. _leggings, leg-armour, greaves_, #Gl#, WW (-rist).

bânsealf f. _salve for pain in the bones_, #Lcd# 138b.

bânsele § m. _(bone-house), body_.

bânwærc m. _pain in the bones_, WW 200^12.

banweorc n. _homicide, murder_, LL 244, 32, 4#d#.

bânwyrt f. _violet_? _small knapweed_? #Lcd#.

bâr (¯æ) m. '_boar_,' _ÆGr_.

bara, bare wk. forms of bær, adj.

barda m. _beaked ship_, WW 289^12.

bârhelm m. _helmet with the image of a boar_? #Fin# 30 (v. also
bânhelm).

barian _to lay bare, uncover_: _depopulate_, W 310^5. [bær I.]

barice = bearrige

barm = bearm

barn I. pret. 3 sg. of biernan. II. = bearn

barrige = bearrige

bârspere n. _boar spear_.

bârsprêot m. _boar spear_.

barstlung = brastlung

barð m. _barque, 'dromo,'_ WW 181^29.

barða = barda

baru napn. of bær adj.

basilisca m. _basilisk_, #PPs# 90^13.

basing m. _cloak_, Æ.

±bâsnian _to await, expect_.

bâsnung f. _expectation_ (N).

bastard m. _bastard_, #Chr# 1066#d#. [_OFr._]

basu (e, ea, eo) gsmn. baswes _purple, scarlet, crimson_. baswa stân
_topaz_.

basuh¯æwen _purple_.

+baswian _to stain red_, ES 33·177.

bât I. fm. _'boat', ship, vessel_, _Chr_. II. pret. 3 sg. of bîtan.

batian _to batten, fatten_, CP 173^20: _heal_: _grow better_, Æ.

bâtswegen m. _boatman_, EC 254.

batt _bat, cudgel, club_, OEG 18b18.

bâtwâ = bûtû

bâtweard m. _ship's watchman_, B 1900.

bað = bæð

±baðian _to wash, lave, 'bathe'_ (tr. and intr.), _give baths
(to others)_, _Lcd_; Æ, AO.

baðu v. bæð.

be- prefix. =1.= specializes the meaning of a tr. vb. (as in behôn,
besettan). =2.= makes an intr. vb. transitive (beswîcan, beðencan).
=3.= is privative (bed¯ælan, belîðan). =4.= does not alter the meaning
(becuman).

be prep. w. d. and instr. (of place) _'by,' near, in, on, upon, with,
along, at, to_. be eallum _altogether_. be fullan _in full_: (of time)
_in, about, by, before, while, during_: _for, because of, in
consideration of, by, by means of, through, in conformity with, in
comparison with_: _about, concerning, in reference to_: _on penalty of_.
be âwihte _in any respect_. be fullan _in excess_. be sumum d¯æle
_partly_. be ânfealdum _single_. be twîfealdum _two-fold_. be fullan
_fully, perfectly_. be ðâm m¯æstan _at the most_. be ðâm (ðân) ðe
_because, as, according as, how_. be norðan, sûðan _to the north, south
of...._ be æftan = beæftan

bêacen (ê) n. _'beacon,' sign, token, phenomenon, portent, apparition_,
_JnL_ (ê): _standard, banner_, _B_.

bêacenfýr n. _beacon fire, lighthouse_, OET 180^7 (¯æ).

bêacenstân m. _stone on which to light a beacon fire_, WW.

bêacn- = bîecn-, bîcn-

bead = bed

bêad I. pret. 3 sg. of bêodan. II. (NG) = bêod

beado == beadu

beadowig = b¯ædewêg

beadu ¶ f. gds. beaduwe, beadowe _war, battle, fighting, strife_.

beaducâf _bold in battle_, #Rd# 1^11.

beaducræft m. _skill in war_, #An# 219.

beaducræftig ¶ _warlike_.

beaducwealm m. _violent death_, #An# 1704.

beadufolm f. _battle-hand_, B 990.

beadugrîma m. _war-mask, helmet_, B 2257.

beaduhrægl ¶ n. _coat of mail_.

beadulâc ¶ n. _war-play, battle_.

beadulêoma m. _(battle-light), sword_, B 1523.

beadumægen n. _battle strength, force_, #Ex# 329.

beadumêce m. _battle-sword_, B 1454.

beadur¯æs m. _rush of battle_, #Ma# 111.

beadurinc ¶ m. _warrior, soldier_.

beadurôf ¶ _strong in battle, renowned in war_.

beadurûn f. _secret of a quarrel_, B 501.

beaduscearp _keen in battle (sword)_, B 2704.

beaduscrûd n. _coat of mail_, B 453; 2660?

beadusearo n. _war equipment_, #Ex# 572.

beaduserce f. _coat of mail_, B 2755.

beaduðrêat m. _war-band, army_, #El# 31.

beaduw¯æpen ¶ n. _weapon of war_.

beaduwang ¶ m. _battlefield_.

beaduweorc ¶ n. _work of battle, warlike operation_.

beaduwra¯æd (o^2) m. _fighting company_, #Lcd# 125b.

beæftan I. adv. _after, hereafter, afterwards, behind_, _AO_; CP (bi-).
['_baft_'] II. prep. w. d. _after, behind_.

be¯æwnian _to join in marriage, marry_, #Chr# 1052#d#. [¯æw]

beaftan _to lament_, _MtL_ 11^17. [= be-hafetian; '_beft_']

bêag I. (¯æ, ê) m. _ring_ (as ornament or as money), _coil, bracelet,
collar, crown, garland_, _Æ_; CP. ['_bee_'; bûgan] II. pret. 3 sg. of
bûgan.

bêag-gifa, -gyfa ¶ m. _ring-giver, lord, king, generous chief_.

bêaggifu (bêah-) ¶ f. _ring-giving_.

bêaghord (h) ¶ n. _ring-hoard_.

bêaghroden ¶ _diademed, adorned with rings or armlets_.

bêaghyrne (h) f. _corner of the eye_, WW 156^41.

bêagian (ê) _to crown_.

bêag-sel n., -sele ¶ m. _hall in which rings are distributed_.

bêagðegu (h) f. _receiving of rings_, B 2176.

bêagwîse n. _round shape_, GD 343^15.

bêagwriða (h) m. _armlet_, B 2018.

bêah I. = bêag. II. pret. 3 sg. of bûgan.

beâh- = bêag-

beâhsian _to ask advice_, #Bl# 199^29; 205^28.

bealanîð = bealunîð

bealcan, bealcettan _to 'belch,' utter, bring up, splutter out, give
forth, emit_, _Ps_; Æ: _come forth_.

beald (a) _'bold,' brave, confident, strong_, _Ps_; AO, CP: _impudent_.

bealde adv. _boldly, courageously, confidently_: _without hesitation,
immediately_.

bealdian _to be bold_, _B_ 2177. ['_bold_']

bealdlîce '_boldly_,' _Jul_.

bealdnes (a) f. _boldness_.

bealdor ¶ m. _lord, master, hero_.

bealdwyrde _bold of speech_, Æ.

beale- = bealu-

bealg, bealh pret. 3 sg. of belgan.

beallucas mp. '_testiculi_,' _Gl_. ['_ballock_']

bealo = bealu

bealo- = bealu-

bealu I. ¶ gs. b(e)al(u)wes n. _'bale,' harm, injury, destruction, ruin,
evil, mischief_, _Sat, Ps, Chr_: _wickedness, malice_: _a noxious
thing_, Æ. II. adj. _baleful, deadly, dangerous, wicked, evil_.

bealubend m. _pernicious bond_, W 178^2.

bealubenn f. _mortal wound_, #Ex# 238.

bealublonden _pernicious_, #GnE# 198.

bealuclomm mf. _oppressive bond_, #Hell# 65.

bealucræft m. _magic art_, #Met# 26^75.

bealucwealm m. _violent death_, B 2265.

bealud¯æd ¶ f. _evil deed, sin_.

bealuful _'baleful,' dire, wicked, cruel_, _Cr_.

bealufûs _prone to sin_, #Rim# 50.

bealu-hycgende §, -hýdig § _meditating mischief_.

bealuinwit n. _deceit, treachery_, #PPs# 54^24.

bealulêas ¶ _harmless, innocent_, _Chr, Gn_. ['_baleless_']

bealunîð ¶ m. _malice, wickedness_.

bealurâp m. _oppressive fetter_, #Cr# 365.

bealusearu n. _wicked machination_, #Jul# 473.

bealusîð ¶ m. _hurt, adversity_: _death_.

bealusorg f. _dire sorrow_, #Ph# 409.

bealuspell n. _baleful message_, #Ex# 510.

bealuðonc m. _evil thought_, #Jul# 469.

bealuwes, bealwes v. bealu.

bêam I. m. _tree_, _KC, Rd_: _'beam,' rafter, piece of wood_, _Chr, Mt_;
CP, Mdf: _cross, gallows_, _Cr_: (¶) _ship_, _Rd_: _column, pillar_:
_sunbeam_, _Chr, Ps_: _metal girder_, _AO_. II. (NG) = býme

bêamere (_Mt_) = býmere

bêamsceadu ¶ f. _shade of a tree_.

bêamtelg § m. _wood-dye, carbonaceous ink_.

bêamweg m. _road made with logs_, BC 1·417´.

bêamwer m. _wooden weir_? BC 2·242´.

bêan (îe) f. _'bean,' pea, legume_, _Lcd_; Mdf.

bêan-belgas, -coddas (_Lk_) mp. _bean-pods, husks or cods_. [v. '_cod_']

bêancynn n. _a kind of bean_, WW 205^3.

bêanen adj. _of beans_, #Lcd# 1·282^9.

bêanlêag f. _land where beans grow_, _KC_ 5·265. [v. '_bean_']

bêanmelu n. _bean meal_, #Lcd# 31b.

bêans¯æd n. _bean seed_.

bêanscalu f. _bean-pod_, OEG 608.

bêar (NG) = bêor

bearce (æ) f. _barking_, #Gl#.

beard m. '_beard_,' _VPs_; Æ.

+bearded _having a beard_, GD 279^14.

beardlêas _beardless, youthful_.

bearg I. m. _'barrow' pig, hog_, _Mt_ (e), _Rd_. II. pret. 3 sg. of
beorgan.

bearh = bearg I. and II.

bearht == beorht

bearhtm I. (br-, e, eo, y) m. _brightness, flash_: _twinkling (of an
eye)_, _instant_. II. == breahtm

bearhtme adv. _instantly_.

bearhtmhwæt _swift as the twinkling of an eye, momentary_, #Az#
107 (br-).

bearhtmhwîl f. _moment, twinkling of an eye, point of time_, GD.

bearm I. (a) m. _lap, bosom, breast_, _Lk_: _middle, inside_: (¶)
_possession_. II. _emotion, excitement_? #PPs# 118. III. = beorma

bearmclâð n. _apron_.

bearmrægl n. _apron_. [hrægl]

bearmtêag _yeast-box_, LL 455[17].

bearn I. (a, eo) n. _child, son, descendant, offspring, issue_, _B, Mt,
TC_; AO, CP. lêoda b. _children of men_. ['_bairn_'] II. = barn pret. 3
sg. of biernan. III. pret. 3 sg. of beiernan. IV. = bereærn

bearnan (N) = biernan

bearncennicge _mother_, DR.

bearn-êaca (CP, Æ), -êacen (CP), -eacnod, -êacnigende (Æ) _pregnant_.

bearnende (NG) = biernende ptc. of biernan.

bearngebyrda fp. _child-bearing_, B 946.

bearngestrêon n. _procreation of children_, #Rd# 21^27.

bearnlêas _childless_, Æ.

bearnlêast (ê^2) f. _childlessness_.

bearnlufe _affection (for a child)_, _adoption_, BH 454^11.

bearn-myrðra m., -myrðre f. _murderer or murderess of a child_.

bearntêam m. _offspring, posterity_, _AO_: _procreation of children_,
HL. ['_bairnteam_']

bearo == bearu

bearrige f? '_braugina_,' '_baruina_,' #Gl#.

bears == bærs

bêarscipe = bêorscipe

±bearu gs. bearwes m. _grove, wood_, _BH_; CP; Mdf. [berwe]

bearug = bearg

bearunæs m. _woody shore_, #Rd# 58^5.

bearwe (æ) f. _basket, wheelbarrow_, LL 455^15.

bearwes v. bearu.

beasu = basu I.

+bêat n. _scourging_, Æ.

±bêatan^7 pret. bêot and (rarely) beoft (ES 38·28) _to 'beat,' strike,
thrust, dash_, _Bo, Bl, Ps_: _hurt, injure_, #Da# 265: _tramp, tread_,
_B_.

bêatere m. _beater, boxer_, Æ.

bêaw m. _gad-fly_, WW.

bebaðian _to bathe, wash_ (tr. intr. and refl.).

bebêodan^2 _to offer, commit, entrust_, CP: _bid, enjoin, instruct,
command, require_, _Æ, Lk_; AO, CP: _announce, proclaim_. ['_bibede_']

bebêodend m. _commander, master_, CP.

bebêodendlic _commanding, imperative_, #ÆGr#.

bebeorgan^3 _to be on one's guard, defend, protect_, _B_. ['_bibergh_']

beber (WW 11^14) = befer

beberan^4 _to carry to, supply with_.

bebindan^3 _to bind about, bind fast_, Æ.

be-birgan, -birigan = bebyrgan

bebîtan (bibî-) _to bite_, Cp 251#m#.

beblâwan _to blow upon_.

bebod n. _command, injunction, order, decree_, _Mt_; Æ, AO, CP. ðâ
bebodu _the (ten) commandments_. ['_bibod_']

beboddæg m. _appointed day_, A 11·102^67.

bebodian wv. = bebêodan

bebodr¯æden f. _command, authority_, #LPs# 118^110.

bebr¯ædan _to spread, cover_, MH 44^19.

bebrecan^4 _to break to pieces_, #Sol# 295.

bebregdan^3 _to pretend_, LkL 20^20.

bebrûcan^2 _to practise_: _consume (food)_.

bebûgan^2 _to flow round, surround, enclose_: _turn from, shun, avoid_,
_El_: _reach, extend_. ['_bibugh_']

bebycgan (A) _to sell_.

bebycgung f. _selling_, WW.

bebyrdan _to fringe, border_, WW 375^41.

be-byrgan (AO) -byrian I. _to raise a mound to, bury, inter_, _Æ_.
['_bebury_'] II. = bebeorgan

be-byrgednes, -byrig(ed)nes f. _burial, burying_.

bebyrig- = bebyrg-

bebyrwan (?= -býwan, BT) _to rub over_, GD 318^3.

bec = bæc

bêc v. bôc.

becæfian _to ornament_, WW 137^22.

+bêcan _to make over in writing, grant by charter_, EC 202´.

becc = bæc II.

becca m. _pick, mattock_, _WW_; Æ. ['_beck_'; and v. Indog.
Forschungen 24]

beccen m. _buyer_, WW (#KGl#) 75^36. [= bycgend]

bece m. = bæc II.

bêce (oe) f. _'beech' (tree)_, _Gl_. (v. also bôc.)

becêapian^1 _to sell_, Æ: _buy_, Æ.

becefed = becæfed, pp. of becæfian.

bêcen I. _'beechen,' made of beechwood_, _Lcd, WW_. II. (NG) = bêacen

beceorfan^3 _to cut, cut off, separate_, Æ. hêafde b. _to behead_.

beceorian _to murmur at, complain of_.

becêowan^2 _to gnaw in pieces_, #Soul# 111.

becêpan I. _to take notice of_, #LPs#. II. = becýpan

beceð pres. 3 sg. of bacan.

becîdan _to complain of_, ÆH 2·470^6.

becierran (e, y) _to turn, turn round, pass by, avoid_, _Met_; CP:
_wind, twist_: _pervert_, _Chr_: _give up, betray_. ['_bicharre_']

becl¯æman _to plaster over, poultice_, #Lcd#.

becl¯ænsian _to cleanse_, #SPs# 18^14.

beclemman _to bind, enclose_, #Sol# 71.

beclencan _to hold fast_, #LPs# 104^18.

beclêsung = beclýsung

beclingan^3 _enclose, bind_, #El# 696.

beclipð (CP) = beclypð pres. 3 sg. of beclyppan.

beclîsung = beclýsung

beclypian (eo) _to accuse, challenge, sue at law_, _LL_. ['_beclepe_']

beclyppan _to clasp, embrace, encompass, hold_, Æ.

beclypping f. _embrace_, OEG.

beclýsan _to close, shut up, enclose, confine, imprison_, Æ. [clûse]
  [[under "clûs"]]

beclýsung f. _enclosure, cell_, OEG 1522: _period, syllogism_, OEG.

bêcn == bêac(e)n

becnâwan^7 _to know_, RB.

becnedan^5 _to knead up_, #Lcd# 93a.

bêcnydlic = býcnendlic  [[redirected to "bîcnendlic"]]

becnyttan _to knit, tie, bind_, Æ, CP.

becol-a? m., -e? f. _spectre_, WW 530^33.

bêcr¯æding = bôcr¯æding

becrêopan^2 _to creep into, crawl_, AO: _be hidden_, Æ.

becst pres. 2 sg. of bacan.

bêctrêow = bôctrêow

becuman^4 _to happen, befall_, Æ: _come, approach, arrive, enter, meet
with, fall in with_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _happen, befall_, _Bo, Æ_:
(impers.) _befit_, MkL 14^31. ['_become_']

bêcun (NG) = bêacan  [[under "bîcnan"]]

becwelan^4 _to die_, LL 400 (1).

becweðan^5 _to say_: _speak to, address, exhort, admonish, blame_, _Ps_:
_'bequeath,' leave by will_, _KC_; Æ.

becweðere m. _interpreter, translator_, EHy 16 (proem.).

becwyddod _bespoken, deposited_, WW 115^39.

becwylman? _to torment_ (BT).

becyme m. _event, result_, BH 372^19.

becýpan _to sell_.

becyrran = becierran

±bed I. n. _prayer, supplication_, Æ, CP: _religious ordinance,
service_, Æ. II. = bedd. III. = bæd pret. 3 sg. of biddan.

bed¯ælan _to deprive, strip, bereave of, rob_, _Æ_: _release, free from_.
['_bedeal_']

bêdan = bêodan

+bêdan = +bædan

bedb¯ær (ê) f. _portable bed_, NG.

+bedbigen f. _payment for prayers_, LL 258 (51). [bycgan]

bedbolster m. _bolster, pillow_, WW 124^20.

bedbûr n. _bed-chamber_, #HGl# 481.

±bedcleofa (e, i, y) m. _bedroom, chamber_: _lair_, #Ps#.

bed-cofa m., -cofe f. _bedchamber_.

bedd n. _'bed,' couch, resting-place_, _Jn, KC_; CP: _garden-bed, plot_,
#Lcd#; Mdf.

+bedda f. _consort, wife_, _B_. ['_i-bedde_']

±beddagas mpl. _rogation days_.

beddclâð m. _bed-covering_; pl. _bed-clothes_.

beddclyfa = bedcleofa

beddgemâna m. _cohabitation_, CP 99^25.

beddian _to make a 'bed,'_ _WW_: _provide one with a bed_, _LL_.

bedding f. _'bedding,' bed-covering_, _LPs, WW_; Æ: _bed_.

beddrêaf = bedrêaf

beddreda (i, y) = bedreda

beddrest ¶ f. _bed_.

beddstôw f. _bed_, BH 410^12.

be-dêaglian (-dêahl) = bedîglian

bedecian _to beg_, Æ, CP.

bedêglian = bedîglian

bedêlan = bed¯ælan

bedelfan^3 _to dig round_, _Lk_: _bury_, _Rood_; AO. ['_bedelve_']

bedelfung f. _digging round_, WW 149^11.

beden pp. of biddan.

bedêpan (#VPs#) = bedîpan

bedeppan = bedyppan

bedfelt mn. _bed-covering_, RB 91^16.

bedgerid n. _(ant's) nest_, #Lcd# 118a.

+bedgiht f. _evening_, WW 117^8.

±bedhûs n. _chapel, oratory_, Æ.

+bedian _to pray, worship_, BH 408^29.

bedîcian _to surround with a dyke, embank, fortify_, #Chr# 1016#e#.

bedidrian = bedydrian

bedîeglan = bedîglian

be-dîglian (-dîhl-; êa, ê, îe) _to conceal, hide, obscure, keep secret_,
Æ: _be concealed, lie hid_.

bedîgling f. _secret place_, #RPs# 80^8.

beding = bedding

bedîolan (K) = bedîeglan

bedîpan (ê, ý) _to dip, immerse_: _anoint_, #CPs# 140^5.

+bedmann m. _worshipper, priest_.

bedôn _to shut_, _PPs_ 147^2. ['_bedo_']

bedol = bedul

±bedr¯æden f. _prayer, intercession_, Æ.

bedragan v. pp. bedrôg.

bedrêaf n. _bed-clothes, bedding_, Æ.

bedreda (i, y) m. (and adj.) _'bedridden' (man)_, _Æ_.

bedrêf = bedrêaf

bedrêosan^2 _to overcome, deceive_? #Gen# 528, 823: _deprive of,
bereave, despoil_.

bedrest = beddrest

bedrida = bedreda

bedrîfan^1 _to drive, beat, strike, assail_, AO: _follow up, pursue_:
_surround, cover_.

bedrincan^3 _to drink up, absorb_, #Lcd#.

bedrîp n. _compulsory service rendered to a landowner at harvest time_,
_LL_. ['_bedrip_']

bedrôg _beguiled_, #Gen# 602.

bedrûgian _to dry up_, #Lcd# 1·336^4.

bedryda = bedreda

bedrýpan _to moisten_, GPH 391^18.

+bedscipe ¶ m. _cohabitation, wedlock_.

+bedstôw f. _place of prayer, oratory_.

bedstrêaw n. _straw for bedding_, ÆL 31^572.

bedtîd f. _bed-time_, WW 176^2.

+bedtîd _time of prayer_, MH 126^18.

bed-ðegn, -ðen, m. _chamber-servant, chamberlain_, WW.

bedu f. _asking, prayer_, CP. [_Goth._ bida]

bedûfan^2 _immerse, submerge, drown_, _Æ_. ['_bedove_']

bedul _suppliant_, WW 180^12.

bedwâhrift n. _bed-curtain_, Ct.

bedydrian _to conceal from_, Æ: _deceive_, Æ.

bedýfan _to immerse_, GD 73^24; #CPs# 68^16.

bedýglan = bedîeglan

bedýpan = bedîpan

be-dyppan (e), _to dip, immerse_, _Æ, Mt_. ['_bedip_']

bedyrnan _to conceal_. [dierne]

beêastan _to the east of_, AO, #Chr#.

beêastannorðan _to the north-east of_, AO.

beebbian _to leave aground by the ebb tide, strand_, #Chr# 897#a#.

beefesian _to cut off the hair_, ÆL 33^84.

beerf- = beyrf-

befædman = befæðman

bef¯ælon pret. 3 pl. of befêolan.

befæstan _to fasten, fix, ground, establish, make safe, put in safe
keeping_, Æ, CP: _apply, utilize_: _commend, entrust to_, Æ, CP.

befæstnian (ea) _to fix_, Æ: _pledge, betroth_.

befættian _to fatten, anoint_, #LPs# 140^5.

befæðman, -mian _to encircle_, Æ.

befaran^6 _to go, go round or among, traverse, encompass, surround_, AO:
_come upon, surprise, catch_, LL 230, 13, 1.

befealdan^7 _to fold, roll up, envelop, clasp, surround, involve,
cover_, Æ, CP: _attach_.

befeallan I. (sv^7) _to fall_, _Mt, CP_; Æ: _deprive of, bereave of_:
_fall to, be assigned to_: '_befall_,' #ÆGr#. II. = befyllan

befeastnian (NG) = befæstan

befêgan _to join_, ÆL 23^425.

befelgan = befylgan

befellan = befyllan

befelðr¯æd = hefeldðr¯æd (#HGl# 489)

befeohtan^3 _to take by fighting_, _Rd_ 4^32. ['_befight_']

befêolan^3 _to put away, bury_: _deliver, grant, consign, entrust to_,
_Ps_: _betake oneself to, apply oneself, devote oneself to, persist,
persevere_, CP: _importune_: _put up with, be pleased with_.
['_bifele_']

befeolhan = befêolan

befêon _to deprive of property_, OEG 3157.

befer (eo, y) m. '_beaver_,' _ÆGr_ (eo); Mdf.

befêran _to surround_, Æ: _come upon, overtake, pass by_: _go about_:
_fall among_, NG.

befician _to deceive_, LL (320^24).

befîlan = befýlan

befilgan = befylgan

befiod (#HGl# 480) pp. of befêon.

beflêan^6 _to peel, skin, flay_, _WW_. beflagen fl¯æsc _entrails_.
['_beflay_']

beflêogan^2 _to fly upon_, _BH_. ['_befly_']

beflêon^2 (w. a.) _to flee from, flee, escape, avoid_, _Ps_; CP.
['_beflee_']

beflôwan^7 _to flow round, over_, _Wif_. ['_beflow_']

befôn^7 _to surround, clasp, include, envelop, encase, clothe_, _Bl_; Æ,
AO, CP: _comprehend, seize, attach (at law)_, _lay hold of, catch,
ensnare_, _Gen_: _contain, receive, conceive_: _explain_, CP. wordum b.
_tell, relate_. on b. _have to do with, engage in_. ['_befong_']

befor = befer

beforan I. prep. +a+. (w. d.) (local) _'before,' in front of, in the
presence of_: (temporal) _before, prior to, sooner than_. +b+. (w. a.)
_before_. II. adv. (local) _before, in front_: (temporal) _before,
formerly, in former times, earlier, sooner_: _at hand, openly_.

beforhtian _to dread_, Æ 23b^525.

befôtian _to cut off one's feet_, Æ 25^117.

befrêogan _to free, liberate_, #Ps#.

be-frînan, -frignan^3 _to question, ask, learn_, Æ.

befrînung f. _inquiry, investigation_, OEG 2309.

befrýnan = befrînan

beftan = beæftan

befullan _entirely, completely, perfectly_, CP 5^20.

befýlan (î) _to befoul, defile_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_befile_']

befylgan _to follow after, pursue, persevere with_, #Lcd#.

befyllan I. _to fell, lay low, strike down_: (¶) _take by killing,
bereave, rob_. [feallan] II. _to fill up_. [full]

bêg = bêag

bêga gmfn. of bêgen.

begalan^6 _to sing incantations over, enchant_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_bigale_']

begân _to go over, traverse_, _Æ_: _get to, come by, fall into_: _go to,
visit, care for, cultivate_, AO: _occupy_, _Æ, BH, Lcd_: _surround_,
_Chr_. ûtan b. _besiege_: _practise, do, engage in, perform, attend to,
be diligent about_, Æ, CP: _honour, serve, worship_: _profess_. on
borh b. _pledge oneself_, CP. ['_bego_']

bêgan = bîegan

begang m. ¶_way, course, circuit, extent_: _district, region_:
_business, undertaking, practice, exercise, service, reverence,
worship_: _cultivation_, GD. [= bîgeng]

beganga = bîgenga

begangan = begân

begangol (bigeong-) m.? _cultivator_, LkR: _worship_, DR.

be-gânnes, -gangnes f. _'calendæ,' celebration_.

begbêam m. _bramble, thorn-bush_.

bêge = bêgen

bêgea = bêga

bêgean = bîegan

begêat I. m. _attainment_, Æ: _acquisitions, property_, Æ. II. pret. 3
sg. of begêotan.

begêm- = begîm-

begêmen (#KGl#) = begîmen

bêgen nm. (but where one thing is m. and the other f. or n., the nom. is
bâ, bû), nf. bâ, nn. bû; gmfn. bêg(e)a, bêgra; dimfn. b¯æm, bâm; am. bû;
af. bâ; an. bû _both_. v. also bûtû. ['_bo_']

begenga = bîgenga

begêomerian _to lament_, W 75^15.

begeondan (AO, CP), begeonde, -geonan, prep. w. a. d.; and adv.
_'beyond,' on the other side_, _Æ, Chr, Jn_.

begeotan = begietan

begêotan^2 _to pour over or upon, anoint, infuse, flood (with)_,
_sprinkle, cover with fluid_, _Chr_; Æ. ['_bigeten_'; _Ger._ begiessen]

beger n. _berry_, #Gl#.

beget = begeat pret. 3 sg. of begietan.

begeten pp. of (1) begêotan, (2) begietan.

bêgian = bêagian

begiellan^3 _to sing, celebrate_, #Seaf# 24.

begietan^5 (e, i, y) _to get, find, acquire, attain, receive, take,
seize_, AO, CP: _happen_: _beget_.

begietend (e) m. _one who gets_, WW 214^25.

begîman (ý) _to look after, take care of_: _do service, attend_: _take
heed, observe_.

begîmen f. _attention, observation_.

begîming f. _invention, device_: _observance_: _care, regard_, OEG (ý).

begînan^1 _to open the mouth wide, swallow_.

beginnan^3 _to 'begin,'_ _Æ_; AO, CP: _attempt, undertake_, Æ:
_attack_, AO.

begir = beger

begirdan = begyrdan

begitan (AO, CP) = begietan

begleddian _to befoul, pollute_, Æ: _stain, dye_, Æ.

beglîdan^1 _to leave, desert_, #PPs# 56^1.

begnagan^6 _to gnaw_.

begneorð? _attentive_, BH 370^2 (?= *becneord, BT).

begnîdan^1 _to rub thoroughly_, #Lcd# 50a.

begnornian _to mourn for_, B 3179.

begong = begang

bêgra gmfn. of bêgen.

begr¯ætan = begrêtan

begrafan^5 _to bury_, _El_ 835. ['_begrave_']

begrêtan _to lament_, #PPs# 77^63.

begrindan^3 ¶ _to grind, polish, sharpen_: _deprive of, rob_.

begrîpan^1 _to grip, seize_: _chide_, _Ps_. ['_begripe_']

begriwen ptc. _steeped in_, Æ.

begroren _overwhelmed_, #Sat# 52.

begrornian = begnornian

begrynian _to ensnare, entrap_. [grîn]

begým- = begîm-

begyrdan _to gird, clothe_, Æ: _surround, fortify_, CP.

begytan = begietan

bêh = bêag, bêah

behabban _to include, hold, surround, comprehend, contain_, AO, CP:
_detain, withhold_.

behâdian _to unfrock (a priest)_, LL.

behæfednes f. _restraint, temperance_.

behæpsian _to fasten a door_, ÆL 31^214.

beh¯æs f. _promise, vow_, #Chr# 1093. [v. '_behest_']

behættian _to scalp_, Æ: _make bald_.

behaldan = behealdan

behamelian _to mutilate, hamstring_, Æ: _strip naked_?

behammen _'clavatus,' (of shoe) patched_ (BT), _studded with nails_
(Napier), GD 37^13.

behât n. _promise, vow_, Æ: _threat_.

behâtan^7 (often w. d. pers.) _to promise, vow, pledge oneself_, _Æ_;
CP: _threaten_. ['_behight_']

behâtland n. _promised land_, GD 204^12.

behâwian _to see clearly, take care, consider_, _Mt_. ['_bihowe_']

behêafdian _to 'behead,'_ _Mt_; Æ, AO.

behêafdung f. _beheading_, Æ.

behêafodlic _capital (punishment)_, OEG 4042.

behealdan^7 _to hold, have, occupy, possess, guard, preserve_, _KC_; CP:
_contain_: _keep, observe, consider_, _Bl, Ps_; AO, CP: _to 'behold,'
look at, gaze on, observe, see_, _Gen_; Æ, CP: _signify_, Æ: _avail,
effect_: _take care, beware, be cautious_, CP: _act, behave_.

behealdend m. _beholder, spectator_, BH 26^23.

behealdennes f. _observance_, DR: _continence_, DR.

behealdnes f. _regard, observation_, Æ.

behêawan^7 _to cut, chip, chop, beat_, CP: _cut off from, deprive of_.

behêdan (#KGl#) = behýdan

be-hêfe, -hêf(e)lic _suitable, proper, necessary_, Æ.

behêfnes f. _convenience, utility_.

behelan^4 _to cover over, hide_.

beheldan = behealdan

behelian _to cover over, conceal, bury_, CP.

behelmian _to cover over_, #Sol# 104.

behêofian _to lament_.

be-heonan, -heonon prep. (w. d.) and adv. _on this side of, close by_.

be-hêot, -hêt, pret. 3 sg. of behâtan.

behicgan = behycgan

behîdan = behýdan

behîdiglîce = behýdiglîce

behienan (#Chr#) = beheonan

behildan _to depart_, #EPs# 138^19.

behindan I. prep. (w. d., a.), adv. _'behind,' after_, _Chr_,
_etc._; CP.

be-hinon, -hionan = beheonan

behîring = behýrung

behîwian _to dissimulate_, RBL 16^7.

behlæmman = behlemman

behl¯ænan _to surround_.

behlâf f. _remainder_, Æ. [= *belâf]

behlêapan^7 _to leap upon, settle on, fix upon, devote oneself to_, CP.

behlehhan = behlyhhan

behlemman ¶ _to dash together_.

behlîdan^1 _to close, cover over_, Æ, AO.

behliden = beliden, pp. of belîðan.

behlyhhan^6 (e) ¶ _to deride, exult over_, _Gu_. ['_bilaugh_']

behlýðan _to rob, deprive of_, #Rd# 15^10.

behôf n. _behoof, profit_: _need, want_, OEG 27^34.

behôfian (abs. and w. g.) _to have need of, require, want_, _BH, Lcd_;
CP, Æ: (impers.) _it behoves, concerns, belongs, is needful or
necessary_, _MtL, Jn_. ['_behove_']

behôflic _necessary_, _MkL_. ['_behovely_']

behogadnes f. _practice_, WW 427^37.

behogian _to care for_, _RB_. ['_bihogien_']

behogod _careful, prudent_, DR. adv. -lîce.

behôn^7 _to hang round_, _CP_. ['_behung_']

behorsian _to deprive of horses_, #Chr#.

behrêosan^2 _to fall_: _cover, shelter_. behroren pp. _divested of_.

behrêowsian _to rue, repent of, make amends_, _Æ_: _compassionate_, Æ.
['_bireusy_']

behrêowsung f. _repentance, penitence_, _Æ_. ['_bireusing_']

behrêowsungtîd f. _time of repentance_, _Septuagesima_, Æ.

behrîman _to cover with hoarfrost_, #Wif# 48.

behringan _to surround_, CP.

behrôpan^7 _to plague, importune_, Lk 18^5.

behrûmian _to besmirch_, WW.

behrûmig _sooty_, MH 52^27.

bêhð f. _witness, sign_, #Jud# 174.

behwearf I. (eo) pret. 3 sg. of behweorfan. II. (#EPs#) = behwearft

behwearft m. _exchange_, #LPs# 43^13.

behweolfan (A) = behwylfan

behweorfan^3 _to turn, change, spread about_: _see to, arrange, prepare,
treat_, Æ: _bury_, Æ.

behwerfan = behwirfan

behwirfan (e, y) _to turn, change, convert_, CP: _exchange_: _prepare,
instruct, exercise_.

behwon _whence_, BH.

behwylfan _to cover, vault over_, #Ex# 426.

behwyrfan (Æ) = behwirfan

behycgan _to consider, bear in mind_: _confide, trust_ (on).

behýdan (î) _to conceal, shelter_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_behide_']

be-hýdednes, -hýdnes f. _concealment, secret place_.

behýdig _careful, watchful, anxious_, Æ. adv. -hýdiglîce, -hýdelîce.

behýdignes f. _solicitude, care, anxiety_. [hygdig] v. MP 1·393.

behygd- = behýd-

behyhtan _to trust_, W 48^8.

behyldan _to flay, skin_, AO.

behylian _to cover, veil_, ÆL 33^237.

behýpan (ê) _to surround_, BH 188^14. [hýpe]

behýpian _to hang up_, OEG 3322.

behýran _to let on hire_, WW.

behýrung f. _letting, loan_, WW.

behýðelîce _sumptuously_, WW 513^6.

beiernan^3 (i, y) _to run up to, over, or into, incur_: _occur to_.

beigbêam = begbêam

beinnan = binnan

beinsiglian _to seal up_, RHy 6^34.

beirnan = beiernan

beiundane = begeondan

belâcan^7 _to inclose_, #Rd# 61^7.

belâdian _to excuse, clear_, Æ, AO, CP.

belâdiendlic _apologetic, that can be excused_, OEG.

belâdigend m. _apologist_, WW 332^2.

belâdung f. _apology, excuse_, WW.

bel¯ædan _to lead astray_, _RB_. ['_belead_']

bel¯æfan _to leave, spare_: _be left, remain, survive_, _Ps_; Æ.
['_beleave_']

belændan = belandian

bel¯æðan _to make hateful, pervert_, W 47^7.

be-l¯æwa (Æ), -l¯æwend, m. _betrayer_.

bel¯æwan _to betray_, Æ.

bel¯æwung f. _betrayal, treachery_, Æ.

belâf I. pret. 3 sg. of belîfan. II. v. behlâf.

belandian _to deprive of lands_, #Chr#.

belcedswêora adj. _having an inflated neck_, #Rd# 79^1. [bælc]

belcentan, belcettan = bealcettan  [[under "bealcan"]]

beld, beldo = bieldo

+beldan I. _to cover, bind (a book)_? JnL p188^3. II. = +bieldan

belêan^6 _to censure, reprove_: _charge with_: _dissuade, forbid,
prevent_, CP.

belê- (NG) = bel¯æ-

belecgan _to cover, invest, surround, afflict_, _An_; AO: _attribute to,
charge with, accuse_. ['_belay_']

belêfan = belýfan

belendan = belandian

belene f. _henbane_.

belêogan^2 _to deceive by lying_, _GD_: (impers.) _be mistaken_.
['_belie_']

beleoran (A) _to pass by, pass over_.

beleorendlic _past_, DR.

belêosan^2 ¶ _to be deprived of, lose_.

belêweda (LL 438^5) = bel¯æwend  [[under "bel¯æwa"]]

belewit = bilewit

belflýs n. _bell-wether's fleece_, LL 451 (14).

belg (æ, i, y) m. _bag, purse, leathern bottle, pair of bellows, pod,
husk_. [v. '_belly_']

+belg m. _anger_: _arrogance_, RB 69^20.

belgan^3 (intr., refl.) _to be or become angry_, CP, Æ: (+) _offend,
provoke_.

belgnes f. _injustice_, MtL 20^13 (bælig-).

+belh = +belg

belhring m. _bell-ringing_, RB.

belhûs = bellhûs

belibban _to deprive of life_.

belicgan^5 _to lie round, surround, hedge in, encompass_, Æ, AO.

belîfan^1 _to remain over, be left_, _Æ_; AO. ['_belive_']

belîfend m. _survivor_, OEG.

belîfian = belibban

belig = belg

belîman _to glue together_, #Sc# 96^19.

belimp n. _event, occurrence, affair_.

belimpan^3 _to concern, regard, belong to, conduce to_, _Bo_; CP:
_happen_, _B_; Æ: _become_: (impers.) _befit_. ['_belimp_']

be-lisnian, -listnian _to castrate_, Æ. belisnod, -listnod pp. as sbm.
_eunuch_. wæs b. '_stupratur_,' #HGl# 507.

belîðan^1 ¶ _to deprive of_. pp. beliden _departed, dead_, #An# 1087.

bell = belle

bellan^3 _to bellow, bark, grunt, roar_, _Rd_. ['_bell_']

belle f. '_bell_,' _KC_; Æ, CP.

bellhûs n. _'bell-house,' belfry_, _LL, WW_.

belltâcen n. _indication (sounding of the hour) by a bell_, HL 11^65.

belltîd f. _a canonical hour marked by the ringing of a bell_.
(cp. belltâcen)

belôcian '_intendere_,' #RPs# 44^5.

belone = belene

belt m. _'belt,' girdle_, _WW_.

belûcan^2 _to lock, shut up, close, surround, enclose, embody_, _Bl, CP,
Mt, VPs_; AO: _stop, impede, block up, choke_, Æ: _preserve, protect_:
_shut out, exclude_, Æ. ['_belouke_']

belune = belene

belûtian _to lie hid_, GD 293^15.

belýfan (ê) _to believe_, Æ. pp. belýfed _having belief_.

belympan = belimpan

belyrtan (N) _to deceive, cheat_, _MtL_ 2^16. ['_belirt_']

belytegian _to allure, seduce_, AO 112^26. [lytig]

bem¯ænan _to 'bemoan,' bewail, mourn over, lament_, _Æ_.

bemancian _to maim_, #Lcd# 3·214^20.

bêmare = býmere

bême = bîeme

bemeldian _to disclose, reveal, denounce_.

bêmere = býmere

bemetan^5 _to estimate, account, consider_, _AO_. ['_bemete_']

bemîðan^1 _to hide, conceal_, CP: _lie hid_.

be-murcian, -murcnian, _to murmur at, grumble over_, AO 48^17.

bemurnan^3 (also wk.) _to mourn, bewail, deplore, be sorry for_: _care
for, take heed for_.

bemûtian _to change, exchange for_, #Gu# 42. [_L._ mutare]

bemyldan _to bury_, WW. [molde]

ben = benn

bên I. f. (±) _prayer, request_, _Lk_; AO, CP: _compulsory service_, LL
447 (v. 2·418, Fron.). ['_bene_'] II. pret. 3 sg. of bannan.

bêna m., bêne f. _suitor, petitioner_, AO.

benacian _to lay bare_. [nacod]

ben¯æman (ê) _to take away, deprive of, rob of_, Æ, AO. [niman]

benc f. '_bench_,' _B_.

bencian _to make benches_, LL 455 (13).

bencsittend ¶ m. _one who sits on a bench_.

bencswêg § m. _bench-rejoicing, sound of revelry_, B 1161.

bencðel ¶ n. _bench-board, wainscotted space where benches stand_, _B_.
[v. '_theal_']

bend mfn. (+b. MtL) _bond, chain, fetter_, _BH, Bl, Mt, Ps_; CP: _band,
ribbon, ornament, chaplet, crown_, _WW_. ['_bend_']

bêndagas mpl. _days of prayer_, '_dies rogationum_,' A 8·329^26.

±bendan _to bend (a bow)_, _Ps_: _bind, fetter_, _Chr_. ['_bend_']

bendfeorm = bênfeorm

beneah (pret. pres. vb.) pl. benugon, pret. benohte _to have at one's
disposal, possess, enjoy_: _require_.

beneced = benacod pp. of benacian.

benêman = ben¯æman

benemnan _to name_: _stipulate, settle, declare, asseverate_.

benêotan^2 ¶ _to deprive of, rob_.

beneoðan (i, y) prep. w. d. _'beneath,' under, below_.

bênfeorm f. _harvest feast_? _bean-feast_? _food required from a
tenant_? (BT), LL 452´.

bengeat n. _wound-gash_, B 1121.

benîdan _to compel_? A 9·110.

beniman^4 _to take, assume, obtain_, AO: _take away from, deprive of,
bereave, rob_, _BH, Bo, Gen_; AO, CP: _contain_: _catch, apprehend_.
['_benim_']

beniming f. _deprival_, WW (bi-).

beniðan = beneoðan

bênlic (oe) _that may be entreated_, DR. adv. -lîce _beseechingly_, DR.

benn ¶ f. _wound, mortal injury_. [bana]

bênn pret. 3 sg. of bannan.

benne f. _reed-grass_, BC (Mdf).

±bennian ¶ _to wound_.

benohte v. beneah.

benorðan _in the north, northwards (of)_.

benoten pp. of benêotan.

benotian _to use, consume_, _ChrB_. ['_benote_']

bênrîp n. _compulsory service rendered to a landowner at harvest time_,
LL 448. [cp. bedrîp]

±bênsian _to pray, supplicate_, BH.

benst pres. 2 sg. of bannan.

bêntîd f. _prayer time, rogation days_, #Men# 75.

bêntigðe, bêntîð(ig)e _granting requests, gracious_, #LPs#: _obtaining
requests, successful_, #Chr#.

benð pres. 3 sg. of bannan.

benugon v. beneah.

bênyrð f. _ploughing required from a tenant_, LL 448 (5,2).

benyðan = beneoðan

bêo I. f. nap. bêon; dp. bêo(u)m '_bee_,' _Ps_; Æ. II. pres. 1 sg. of
bêon.

bêobrêad n. _honey with the comb_.

bêoce = bêce

bêoceorl m. _bee-master, bee-keeper_, LL 448[5].

bêocere m. _bee-keeper_, LL. [_MHG._ bîkar]

+beod = +bed

bêod m. _table_, _Mt_: _bowl, dish_. ['_beod_']

bêodærn n. _refectory, dining-room_, Æ (-ern). on bêoderne _at table_.

beodan = bidon pret. pl. of bîdan.

±bêodan^2 _to command, decree, summon_, Æ, AO, CP. b. ût _call out
(an army)_, _banish_: _declare, inform, announce, proclaim_, _Gu, LL_:
_threaten_: _offer, proffer, give, grant, surrender_, _Æ, Gen_; AO:
(refl.) _show oneself, behave_: _exact, collect_. ['_bid_,' '_i-bede_']

bêodbolle f. _table-bowl_, #Gl#.

bêodclâð m. _'gausape,' table-cloth, carpet_, #ÆGr# 34^8.

bêoddern = bêodærn

bêoddian _to do joiner's work_, LL 455 (13).

bêodend m. _preceptor_, CM 967.

bêodendlic = bebêodendlic

bêodern (Æ) = bêodærn

bêodfæt n. _table-vessel, cup_, WW 204^25.

bêodfers n. _grace at meal-time_.

bêodgæst m. _table-companion_, #An# 1090.

bêodgenêat ¶ m. _table-companion_.

bêodgereordu np. _feast_, #Gen# 1518.

bêod(h)rægl n. _table-cloth_, WW 126^33.

bêodlâfa fp. _table-leavings_, #Bl# 53^13.

bêodland n. _land from which the table of monasteries, etc., was
supplied, glebe-land_, Ct.

bêodlês f. _table-allowance_, TC 474^6.

bêodrêaf n. _table-cloth_, TC 530^36.

bêod-scêat n., -scýte m. _table-napkin, towel_, WW 449^22.

bêodwyst f. _a table with food on it_, #LPs# 22^5. [wist]

beofer = beofor

beofian = bifian

beofor (e, y) m. _beaver_.

beoft redupl. pret. of bêatan; beoftadon is from a later wk. *beoftian
(ES 38·28).

beofung = bifung

bêogang m. _swarm of bees_, WW.

+bêogol (ý) _submissive, obedient_: _forgiving_, Æ. [bûgan]

bêohâta m. _chief_? _prince_? #Ex# 253?

beolone = belene

bêom I. dp. of bêo I. II. = bêam. III. = bêo pres. 1 sg. of bêon.

bêomôder f. _queen-bee_, OEG.

bêon I. anv. [conj. in full (WS and A) Wt 548] _to be, exist, become,
happen_. b. ymbe _to have to do with_. b. of _to be gone_. (v. also eom,
wesan.) II. nap. of bêo I.

bêona gp. of bêo I.

bêonbrêad = bêobrêad

bêonbroð n. _mead_? (or? bêanbroð ES 38·302).

bêonnon pret. pl. of bannan.

bêor n. _strong drink_, _'beer,' mead_, _Lk_ (v. A 27·495). [bêow]

+bêor m. _pot-companion, guest_, Æ.

beora = bearu

±beoran = beran

bêorbyden f. _beer-barrel_, LL 455 (17).

beorc I. (e, i, y) f. _birch_, Mdf: _name of the rune for =b=_. II. (±)
n. _barking_.

beorcan^3 (tr.) _to 'bark,'_ _CP_: (intr.) _bark at_, _Lcd_.

beorce = beorc

beorcen (i, y) _of birch_.

beorcragu (e^1) f. _lichen from a birch-tree_, #Lcd# 99b.

beorcrind (e^1) f. _birch-bark_, #Lcd# 119b.

beord (BH 392^27) = bord

bêordræst(e) f. _dregs of beer_, #Lcd#.

beorg m. _mountain, hill_, _Lk, AO_; Mdf: _mound, tumulus_, _'barrow,'
burial place_, _Æ, Lcd_.

+beorg n. _protection, defence, refuge_, W.

beorgælfen f. _orcad_.

±beorgan I. sv^3 (w. d.) _to save, deliver, preserve, guard, defend,
fortify, spare_, _An, Ps_; AO, CP: (w. refl. d.) _beware of, avoid,
guard against_. ['_bergh_'] II. = byrgan II.

beorg-hlið n. nap. -hleoðu _mountain-height, mountain-slope_.

+beorglic _fitting, profitable_, LL, W: _safe, prudent_, Æ.

beorgseðel n. _mountain dwelling_. [setl]

beorgstede m. _mound_.

±beorh I. == beorg. II. imperat. of beorgan.

beorhlêode (WW 178^41) = burglêode

+beorhnes f. _refuge_, #CPs# 30^3.

+beorhstôw f. _place of refuge_, #PPs# 31^8.

beorht (e, y) I. _'bright,' shining, brilliant, light, clear_, _Bo, El,
Gu_: _clear-sounding, loud_, _Cra_: _excellent, distinguished,
remarkable, beautiful, magnificent, noble, glorious_, _PPs_: _pure,
sublime, holy, divine_. II. n. _brightness, gleam, light_. êagan b.
_twinkling of an eye_: _sight_.

beorhtan = bierhtan

beorhtblôwende _bright-blooming_, #Lcd# 1·404^9.

beorhte _brightly, brilliantly, splendidly_: _clearly, lucidly,
distinctly_, CP.

beorhthwîl (OEG) = bearhtmhwîl

beorhtian _to glisten, shine_, _BH, Ps_: _to sound clearly_, _B_: _to
make bright_, _VPs_. ['_bright_']

+beorhtian = +beorhtnian

beorhtlic _brilliant, clear, shining, splendid_. adv. -lîce, _Mk_; Æ.
['_brightly_']

beorhtm = bearhtm

beorhtnes f. _'brightness,' clearness, splendour, beauty_, _JnL,
Lk_; CP.

±beorhtnian (e) _to grow bright_, OEG 534: _glorify_.

beorhtrodor m. _shining heavens_, #Ex# 94.

beorhtte (= *beorgihte) pl. _mountainous_, AO 10^25.

beorhtu = bierhtu

beorhtword (y^1) _clear-voiced_, #Sat# 238.

bêorhyrde m. _cellarer, butler_, #Cra# 75.

beorm- = bearm-

beorma m. _'barm,' yeast, leaven_, _Mt_.

+beormad _leavened_, MtR 13^33.

beorn I. ¶ m. _man_: _noble, hero, chief, prince, warrior_, _B, Ma_:
_rich man_, #Run# 12. ['_berne_'] II. = barn pret. 3 sg. of biernan.
III. = bearn

beornan (#VPs#) = biernan

beorncyning m. _lord of heroes_, B 2148.

beorne = byrne

Beornice mp. _Bernicians_, _inhabitants of part of Northumbria_.

beorning (= ie) f. _incense_, LkL 1^11.

beornðrêat m. _troop of men_, #Pa# 50.

beornwiga m. ¶_warrior, hero_.

bêorscealc _reveller, feaster_, B 1240.

±bêorscipe, m. _feast, banquet, revel_, Æ, CP.

bêorsele ¶ m. _beer-hall, banqueting hall_.

bêorsetl n. _ale-bench_, #Jul# 687.

beorswinig (NG) = bærsynnig

bêorðegu ¶ f. _beer-drinking_.

beorð fn? _birth_: _the thing born_.  [[from first edition]]

-beorðling (ie) v. hyse-b.  [[headword spelled "hyseberðling"]]

±beorðor (e, o, u, y) n. _child-bearing, child-birth_: _what is born,
foetus, offspring_.

beorðorcwelm m. _abortion_, WW 348^23.

beoruh = beorg

beosmrian = bismrian  [[redirected to "bismerian"]]

bêost m. _beestings, the first milk of a cow after calving_, _WW_:
_swelling (of the ground)_? v. Mdf. ['_beest_']

beosu = basu

±bêot I. n. _boastful speech, boast, threat_, _Æ, Gen_. on b.
_boastfully_: _promise, vow_, AO: _command_: _peril, danger_, #Da# 265.
[= behât; '_beot_,' '_i-beot_'] II. pret. 3 sg. of bêatan.

beotian = botian

±bêotian _to threaten_, _Jul_: _boast, vow, promise_, AO. ['_beoten_']

±bêotlic _arrogant, exulting, boastful, threatening_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

bêotmæcg m. _leader_, #Da# 265.

bêoton pret. pl. of bêatan.

bêotung f. _threatening_.

bêotword ¶ n. _boast_: _threat_.

bêoðêof m. _bee-thief_, LL 54[9,2].

bêoum dp. of bêo.

bêow n. _barley_, #Gl#.

bêowan = býwan

bêowyrt f. _bee-wort, sweet flag_, #Lcd#.

bep¯æcan _to deceive, cheat, seduce_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_bipeche_']

bep¯æcend m. _deceiver_, Æ.

bep¯æcestre f. _whore_, #ÆGr# 175^9.

bep¯æcung f. _deception_, OEG.

beprîwan (ê) _to wink_, #Bo#, W.

bêr (NG) = b¯ær

bera m. '_bear_,' _Æ_.

beræccan = bereccan

ber¯ædan _to deprive, take by treachery, rob_: _betray_, Æ: _deliberate
on_: _get the better of_.

ber¯æsan _to rush upon or into_, Æ, CP.

±beran (eo) _to 'bear,' carry, bring, take away, carry out, extend_,
_B_; Æ, AO, CP: _bring forth, produce_, _Bl, Mt, Gen_ (and
v. '_ibere_'). berende _fruitful_. +boren _born, own (by birth)_:
(with ûp) _set forth, open (a case)_, #Chr# 1052#e#: _wear_, _AO_:
_endure, support, sustain_, _LL, Mt_; CP.

berascin n. _bear-skin_, EC 250.

+berbed _vermiculated_, DR 4^3.

ber-bêne, -bîne f. _verbena_, #Lcd#.

berc == beorc

+berd- = +byrd-

+bêre = +b¯ære

bere m. _barley_, _JnLR_; Æ. ['_bear_']

bereærn n. '_barn_,' _LkL_. [bere, ærn]

berêafere m. _despoiler_, OEG 46^36.

berêafian _to 'bereave,' deprive of, take away, seize, rob, despoil_,
_Bo_; Æ, AO.

berêafigend m. _despoiler, robber_.

berebrytta m. _barn-keeper_, LL 451 (17).

berêcan _to cause to smoke, smoke_ (tr.), #Lcd# 1·106^16.

bereccan _to relate_: _excuse or justify oneself_, CP.

berecorn n. _barley-corn_.

+bered _crushed_, WW: _harassed, oppressed_, NG.

berêfian (#KGl#) = berêafian

bereflôr m. _barn-floor, threshing-floor_, _LkL_. [v. '_bear_']

beregafol n. _rent paid in barley_, LL 116 (59^1). [cp. gafolbære]

beregræs n. _barley-grass, fodder_, WW 148^26.

berehalm n. _barley haulm, straw_, #Lcd# 157a.

bereland (ber-) _barley land_, KC 3·367^9.

beren I. _of barley_, Æ. II. = biren. III. = bereærn

berend m. _bearer, carrier_, #Gl#.

berendan _to peel, take off husk_, #Lcd#.

berende v. beran.

berendlîce _with fecundity_, DR 32^8.

berendnes f. _fertility_, DR 108^11.

berenhulu f. _barley-husk_, #Sc# 95^19.

berênian _to bring about_, #Ex# 147: _ornament, mount (with silver)_, KC
6·101^22.

berêocan^2 _to fumigate_, LL (164^5).

berêofan^2 ¶ _to bereave, deprive, rob of_.

berêotan^2 _to bewail_, #Hell# 6.

berêowsian = behrêowsian

-berere v. wæter-b.  [[under "wæterberend"]]

berern (NG) = bereærn

beres¯æd n. _barley_, BH 366^27.

beretûn m. _barley-inclosure, threshing-floor, barn_, _MtL_; Æ.
['_barton_']

berewæstm m. _barley-crop_, #Lcd# 1·402^6.

berewîc f. _barley-yard, demesne farm_, _TC_. ['_berewick_']

berg = (1) bearg, (2) beorg

berg- = beri-, byrg-

berh = bearh pret. 3 sg. of beorgan.

berht = beorht

berht- = beorht-, bierht-

berhtm- = breahtm-

berian I. _to make bare, clear_, B 1239. [bær] II. = byrgan II.

+berian = +byrian

bericge = bearrige

berîdan^1 _to ride round, surround, besiege_, _LL_: _overtake, seize,
capture, occupy_, #Chr#. ['_beride_']

berie f. '_berry_,' _Lcd_: _grape_, _Æ_.

berig I. n. _berry_, #RPs# 77^47. II. = byrig, ds. of burg.

berigdrenc m. _drink made of mulberries_, WW 114^22.

berige = berie

berigea = byrga

be-rindan, -rindran _to strip off bark, peel_.

berinnan^3 _to run upon, run over, wet, bedew_, _Cr_ 1176. ['_berun_']

berland = bereland

bern = bereærn

bern- = bærn-, biern-

bernan (#VPs#) = bærnan

bernhus n. _barn_, GD 68^22. [= beren-]

berôfon (pret. pl. of *berafan or *berebban) _despoiled_, #Gen# 2078.

berôwan^7 _to row round_, #Chr# 897#a#.

berst = byrst

+berst n. _bursting, eruption_, W 186^7.

±berstan^3 intr. (tr. at #Rd# 2^8) _to break_, _'burst,' fail, fall_,
_B, Lcd, Ma_; Æ, AO: _break away from, escape_: _break to pieces, crash,
resound_.

berthwîl = beorhthwîl

bertûn = beretûn

berð- = beorð-, byrð-

+bêru = +b¯æru

berûmod = behrûmod, pp. of behrûmian.

berunnen pp. of berinnan.

berwe ds. of bearu.

berwinde f. _'bearbind,' navel-wort_, WW 300^19.

berýfan _to deprive_, #Mod# 63. [rêaf]

berýpan _despoil of, strip, spoil, plunder, rob_, Æ.

bes¯ægan _to sink_, GPH 388^85.

besæncan = besencan

bes¯ætian _to lay wait for_, AO 146^11.

besârgian _to lament, bewail, be sorry for, pity_, Æ. [sârig]

besârgung f. _compassion_, Æ.

  [[Entry before author's corrections:
  besârgung f. _sorrowing_, VHy: _compassion_, Æ.]]

besâwan^7 _to sow_, Æ.

bescêad (bi-) n. _distinction_.

bescêadan^7 _to separate, discriminate_: _scatter, sprinkle over_, #Lcd#
20b.

besceadian (_Sol_ 339) = besceaduwian

besceaduwian, _to overshadow_, #RPs# 139^8. ['_beshade_']

besceafan^6 _to scrape thoroughly_, #Lcd# 143b.

bescêan pret. 3 sg. of bescînan.

besceatwyrpan '_despondi_,' v. OEG 1^4555; 2^346; ES 42·170.

bescêawere m. _observer_, DHy 24^15

bescêawian _to look round upon, survey, contemplate, consider, watch_,
Æ, AO: _look to, care for_. bescêawod _cautious, careful_, #Lcd#
3·436^11.

besceawiendlic _contemplative_, OEG 991.

bescêawodnes f. _vision, sight_.

bescêawung f. _contemplation_.

besceddan = besceadan  [[headword spelled "bescêadan"]]

bescencan _to give to drink_, #Gu# 596.

besceofan = bescûfan

besceoren (WW 217^24) = bescoren pp. of bescieran.

bescêotan^2 _to shoot into, plunge into, implant_: _happen, occur_, AO.

be-sceran, -scerwan = bescieran

bescerian = bescierian

bescieran^4 _to shear, shave, cut hair, give the tonsure_, _Æ, AO_.
['_beshear_']

bescierednes (y^2) f. _deprivation_, WW 351^13.

bescierian _to separate from, deprive of_, #Chr#: _defraud_.

bescînan^1 _to shine upon, light up, illuminate_, _Rd_; Æ. ['_beshine_']

besciran = bescieran

bescirian = bescierian

bescîtan^1 _to befoul_, WW 507^28.

bescrêadian _to scrape off, clean off_, ES 42·171.

bescrepan^5 _to scrape_, #Lcd# 101a.

bescûfan^2 _to shove, impel, thrust down, hurl, throw_, Æ, AO:
_force_, Æ.

bescýlan _to look askance_, #Bo# 121^30. [sceol]

bescyr- = bescier-

besêcan _to beseech, beg urgently_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

besecgan _to announce, introduce_: _defend, excuse oneself_: (w. on)
_accuse_, Æ.

beselian = besylian

besellan _to surround, cover (over)_: _hand over_.

besema = besma

besencan _to cause to sink, submerge, immerse, drown_, _Bl, Mt_; AO, CP:
_plunge into (fire)_, GD 317. ['_besench_']

besendan _to send_, Æ.

besengan _to singe, burn_, AO.

besêon I. sv^5 (tr., intr. and refl.) _to see, look, look round,
behold_, _Æ, Mk, Ps_; AO: _look after, go to see, visit_: _provide for_.
b. tô _look upon, have regard to_, CP. ['_besee_'] II. sv^1 _to
suffuse_, #Cr# 1088.

besêoðan _to boil down_, #Lcd#.

besêowian (î, ý) _to sew together, sew up_, _Ep_. ['_besew_']

be-serian, -serwan = besierwan

besettan _to put, place, set near, appoint_, Æ: _own, keep, occupy_:
_'beset,' cover, surround with, adorn_, _B_; CP, Æ: _besiege, invest_,
_An_: _institute, set going_.

besîdian _to regulate the size of anything_, RB 89^18. [sîd]

besierwan _to ensnare, surprise, deceive, defraud, oppress_, AO. [searu]

besîgan (on) _to rush_, v. OEG 4126.

besilfran _to silver_, #VPs# 67^14.

besincan^3 (intr.) _to sink_, _AO_. ['_besink_']

besingan^3 _to sing of, bewail_: _sing charms, enchant_, Æ.

besirwan (AO, CP) = besierwan

besittan^5 _to sit round, surround, beset, besiege_, _Chr_; AO: _hold
council_: _occupy, possess_. ['_besit_']

besîwian = besêowian

besl¯æpan^7 _to sleep_, LL (284^3).

beslêan^6 _to strike, beat, cut off, take away, deprive by violence_, Æ.

beslêpan _to slip on, cover, impose, put on, clothe_.

beslîtan^1 ¶ _to slit, tear_.

besma m. _'besom,' broom, rod_, _AO, Mt_.

besmêagan _to consider about, inquire into_, ÆL 23b^633.

+bêsmed _curved_, WW 515^9. [bôsm]

bêsming f. _curve, curvature_, WW. [bôsm]

besmirwan _to 'besmear,'_ WW.

besmîtan^1 _to soil, defile, pollute, dishonour_, _Bl_; Æ, CP.
['_besmit_']

besmitenes f. _soil, stain, defilement, degradation, dirtiness_, Æ.

besmittian _to defile_.

besmiðian _to work (in metal)_, _forge, surround with forged work_.

besmocian _to smoke, envelop with incense_, ANS 84·3.

besmyred = besmirwed pp. of besmirwan.

besn¯ædan ¶ _to cut, mutilate_.

besnîwian _to cover with snow_, _WW_. ['_besnow_']

be-snyðian, -snyððan ¶ _to rob, deprive of_.

besolcen _stupefied, dull, sluggish, inactive, slow_, CP.

besorg _dear, beloved_, Æ.

besorgian _to regret_: _be anxious about, dread, shrink from_, Æ.

besorh = besorg

besp¯ætan _to spit upon_, ÆH 2·248^24.

bespanan^6 _to lead astray, entice, incite, urge, persuade_, AO.

besparrian _to bar, shut_, #Gl#.

bespirian = bespyrigan

besprecan^5 _to speak about_, _AO_: _speak against, accuse of_, _Ps_:
_claim at law_, _LL_: _complain_. ['_bespeak_']

besprengan _to besprinkle_, _Lcd_. ['_bespreng_']

bespyrigan _to track, trace_, LL.

best adv. (used as superl. of wel) _best, most_.

besta, beste wk. forms of superl. adj. betst.

best¯ælan (ê) _to lay a charge against, convict_.

bestæppan^6 _to tread upon, step, go, enter_, Æ.

bestandan^6 _to stand round or about, beset, surround_, _Æ_: _attend
to_, Æ: _beset, harass_, _Jn_. ['_bestand_']

bestealcian _to move stealthily, steal, 'stalk,'_ ÆL 32^40. [stealc]

bestefnod ptc. _provided with a fringe_, WW 375^41.

bestelan^4 _to move stealthily, steal away, steal upon_, _AO, LL_; Æ,
CP: (¶) _deprive_. ['_besteal_']

bestêlan = best¯ælan

bestêman = bestýman

bestêpan (= i) _to deprive of (children)_, GD 76^18.

bestingan^3 _to thrust in, push_, Æ.

bestrêdan _to bestrew, cover_, BH 154^27 (#b#).

bestrêowian _to 'bestrew,' besprinkle_, _Æ_.

bestreððan _to bestrew, cover over_.

bestrîcan^1 _to make a stroke_, #Lcd# 186b. [strîca]
  [[headword spelled "strica"]]

bestrîdan^1 _to 'bestride,' mount_, _Æ_.

bestrîpan _to strip, plunder, despoil_.

bestrûdan^7 _to spoil, plunder, rob_.

bestrýpan = bestrîpan

bestryððan = bestreððan

bestuddian _to be careful for, trouble about_, #Kl# 14^6.

bestýman (e) _to bedew, wet, flood_, B 486. [stêam]

bestyrian _to heap up_, _BH_. ['_bestir_']

bestyrman _to agitate_, #Bo# 9^11.

besu = basu

besûpan^2 _to sup up, swallow_, #Lcd# 113b.

besûtian _to besmirch_, GPH 403^26.

besûðan = be sûðan

besw¯ælan _to burn, singe, scorch_, Æ.

besw¯æpan = beswâpan

besw¯ætan _to sweat, toil_, #Sc# 111^14.

beswâpan^7 _to clothe, cover over, veil, protect_, CP: _persuade_, _BH_.
['_beswape_']

beswelgan _to swallow up_, #EPs# 106^27; 123^3.

beswemman _to make to bathe_, #Bo# 115^8.

beswencan _to afflict_, #CPs# 68^18.

besweðian _to swathe, wrap up, wind round_.

beswic n. _treachery, deceit_, AO (bî-), CP: _snare_.

beswica (bî-) m. _deceiver_.

beswican^1 _to deceive, seduce, betray, circumvent, frustrate_, _Bl,
Mt_; AO, CP: _to overcome, supplant_, AO. ['_beswike_']

beswîcend m. _deceiver, seducer_, #Gl#.

beswicenes f. _deception_: _surrender_.

beswicfalle f. _trap_, #Gl#.

beswician _to escape, be free from_, BH.

beswicol _deceitful_, CP 238^16. (bi-)

beswîcung f. _deception_, WW.

beswincan^3 _to toil, exert oneself, make with toil_, _Jn_: _till,
plough_, Æ. beswuncen _exhausted, tired out_. ['_beswink_']

beswingan^3 _to flog, scourge, beat, strike_, _Æ_; CP. ['_beswinge_']

beswylian _to drench, flood_, #Rood# 23. [swilian]

besyftan _to sprinkle_, ÆL 23^165. [siftan]

besylfran = besilfran

besylian _to sully, defile, stain_, Æ.

besyr-ewian, -i(a)n = besierwan

bet adv. _better_, #Bo#. ['_bet_']

-bêta v. d¯æd-b.

betâcnian _to 'betoken,' designate_.

bet¯æcan (w. d.) _to make over, give up to, impart, deliver, entrust,
commend to_, _Æ, Lk_; AO, CP: _appoint (for)_, _set apart as, dedicate_:
_show, point out_, _Lk_: _give orders_, RB 130^4: _pursue, hunt_, WW
92^28. ['_beteach_']

±bêtan _to amend, repair, restore, cure_, CP: _make good, make amends,
remedy, compensate, atone, pay_ 'bôt' _for an offence_, _Æ, Mt, Lcd_;
AO, CP: _attend to (fire or light)_, _AO_. ðurst b. _quench thirst_.
[bôt; '_beet_' vb.]

betast = betst

betboren _of higher birth_, LL.

bête f. _'beet,' beetroot_, _Lcd_. [_L._ beta]

-bête v. twi-b.

bêtel = (1) bîetl; (2) bîtol  [[second reference ambiguous]]

beteldan^3 ¶ _to cover, hem in, surround_: _overload, oppress_.

betellan _to speak about, answer, defend oneself (against a charge)_,
_exculpate oneself_, _Chr_; Æ.

bêtend m. _restorer_, #Ruin# 28.

+bêtendnes f. _amendment_, OEG 58^6.

betêon^1,2 _to cover, surround, enclose_, _AO_; Æ, CP: _dispose of,
bestow, bequeath_: _impeach, accuse_. ['_betee_']

betera '_better_,' _AO, Mk_. followed by g. = _better in respect of...._

-bêtere v. d¯æd-b.  [[under "d¯ædbêta"]]

±beterian _to 'better,' improve_, _CP_: _trim (lamp)_, GD.

beterring f. _improvement_, Æ.

betest = betst

betiênan = betýnan

betihtlian _to accuse_, LL.

betillan = betyllan

betimbran _to construct, build_, _B_. ['_betimber_']

betînan = betýnan

bêting = b¯ætung

bêtl = bîetl

betlic ¶ _grand, excellent_.

bêtnes f. _reparation, atonement_, LL (264^16).

betoce = betonice

betogenes f. _accusation_, LL.

betolden pp. of beteldan.

betonice f. '_betony_,' _Lcd_.

betost = betst

betr- = beter-

betræppan = betreppan

betredan^5 _to tread upon, cover_, #CPs# 138^10.

betrendan _to roll_, ES 37·180.

betreppan _to entrap, catch_, _Chr_. ['_betrap_']

be-trymman, -trymian _to enclose, surround, besiege_.

betst I. superl. adj. _'best,' first_, _AO, Chr, Cr_; CP. as sb.
_people of position_, _WW, Chr_. II. adv. _in the best manner, most_.

betstboren _best-born, eldest_.

bett == bet

be-tuh, -tuoxn (CP), -tux = betwux

betuldon pret. pl. of beteldan.

+bêtung f. _repair, maintenance_, LL.

betwênan = betwêonan

betweoh, betweohs = betwux

betwêonan, betwêonum I. prep. w. g. d. a. _between, among, amid, in the
midst_, _Ps, Bl_. II. adv. '_between_,' _BH_: _in the meantime,
meanwhile_: _in turn, by turns_, CM (-twýn-).

betweox, betweoxn, betwih(s) = betwux

betwîn- = betwêon-

betwînforlêtnes f. _intermission_, DR.

betwux (Æ, AO, CP) betwuht, betwix, betwux(t), betwisc prep. w. d. a.
_between, among, amongst, amidst, during_. b. ðisum _meanwhile_. b. ð¯æm
ðe _whilst_. ['_betwixt_']

betwuxâlegednes f. _interjection_, #ÆGr# 278^2.

betwuxâworpennes f. _interjection_, #ÆGr# 10^20.

betwuxblinnes (twih) f. _intermission_, DR 12^3.

betwuxfæc (yx) _internal_, OEG 3861.

betwuxgangan^7 (twih) _to go between_, #VPs# 28^7.

betwuxgangende (twih) _separating_.

betwuxgesett _interposed_.

betwuxlicgan^5 (twih) _to lie between_, BH 72^10.

betwuxsendan _to send between_.

betwuxt, -twyh, -twyx(t) = betwux

betýhtlian = betîhtlian  [[headword spelled "betihtlian"]]

betyllan _to allure, decoy_, BH 358^4.

betýnan (î, îe) _to hedge in, enclose, shut, bury_, AO, CP: _end_, BH.
[tûn]

betýnung f. _conclusion_, OEG 3210.

betyran _to pitch, stain a dark colour_. [teoru]

betyrnan _to turn round_: _prostrate oneself_, RB.

beð I. = bið pres. 3 sg. of bêon. II. = bæð

beðæncan = beðencan

beðan = beðian

beðearfende _needy, indigent_, #KGl# 708.

beðearflic _profitable_, ÆL 23b^242.

beðearfod _needy_, ES 8·474^50.

beðeccan _to cover, protect, cover over, conceal_.

beðen = beðung

beðencan _to consider, remember, take thought for, take care of, care
for_, _Gu_: (refl.) _reflect_, _'bethink' oneself_, _Lk_; Æ: _trust,
confide in, entrust to_, AO.

be-ðenian, -ðennan _to cover, stretch on or upon, spread over_.

beðêodan _to be joined (to)_, _adhere (to)_, RB 134^20.

beðerscan _to winnow, thrash_, #PPs# 43^7.

beðettan _to bathe_, #Lcd# 3·90^15 (A 30·397).

±beðian _to heat, warm, foment_, _Lcd_; Æ: _cherish_. ['_beath_']

beðrâwan^7 _to twist_, GPH 391^16.

beðridian _to circumvent, overcome, force_, AO.

beðringan^3 ¶ _to encircle, encompass_: _beset, oppress, burden_.

beðryccan _to press down_, #Cr# 1446.

beðrydian, beðryððan = beðridian

beðrýn _to press_, NC 273.

beðuncan (#Rd# 49^7) = beðencan

beðung f. _bathing, bath, fomentation, cataplasm_, _Lcd_; CP, Æ.
['_beathing_'; bæð]

be-ðurfan swv. pres., 3 sg. -ðearf, pl. -ðurfon, pret. -ðorfte. (w. g.
or a.) _to need, have need of, want_, Æ, CP.

beððan = beðian

beðwêan^6 _to moisten, wet_, #LPs# 6^7.

beðwyrian _to deprave_, WW 386^7. [ðweorh]

beðýn _to thrust_, AO 158^6.

beufan = bufan

beûtan = bûtan

bewacian _to watch, guard_, Æ.

bewadan^6 _to emerge_, #Rd# 88^24.

bew¯æfan _to enfold, wrap round, cover over, clothe_, Æ, CP.

bew¯ægan _to deceive, frustrate_, #BVPs#.

bewægnan _to offer, proffer_, B 1193.

bew¯ælan _to oppress, afflict_, #An# 1363.

bew¯æpnian _to disarm_, Æ.

bewærlan _to pass by_: _be free from_, DR.

bewarenian _to guard against, be on one's guard_, CP.

bewarian _to keep watch, guard, preserve, ward off_, CP.

bewarnian = bewarenian

bewâwan^7 _to blow upon_, #Wa# 76. (biwâune = biwâwene)

beweallan^7 _to boil away_, #Lcd#.

bewealwian _to wallow_, #Bo# 115^9.

beweardian _to guard, protect_: _observe closely_.

beweaxan^7 _to grow over, cover over, surround_, Æ.

beweddendlic _relating to marriage_, OEG 1122.

beweddian _to betroth, marry_, Æ: _give security_. ['_bewed_']

beweddung f. _betrothal_, LL 442Ha.

bewefan^5 _to cover over_, #Lcd# 3·146^4.

bewegan^5 _to cover_.

bewêled (ý^2) _poisoned, polluted_, ES 38^344. [wôl]

bewellan _to knead, mix together_.

bewendan _to turn, turn round_, _Æ_; (refl.) _Mt_ 9^22: _turn one's
attention, convert_, Æ. ['_bewend_']

bewenian ¶ _to entertain, take care of, attend upon_.

beweorcan = bewyrcan

beweorpan^3 _to cast, cast down, plunge, throw_, Æ, AO: _beat_, Æ:
_surround_.

beweorðian _to adorn_, DD 118.

beweotian = bewitian

bewêpan^7 _to weep over, mourn, bewail_, _Æ_; AO. ['_beweep_']

bewêpendlic _lamentable_.

bewêpnian = bew¯æpnian

bewerenes f. _prohibition_, BH 86^13.

bewerian _to guard, protect, defend_, Æ, AO: _check, prevent,
forbid_, Æ.

bewerigend m. _protector_, Æ.

bewerung f. _defence, fortification_.

bewestan prep. w. d. or adv. _to the west of_, _Chr_. ['_bewest_']

bewîcian _to encamp_, #Chr# 894#w#.

bewindan^3 _to wind round, clasp, entwine, envelop, encircle, surround_,
_B, Mt_; AO, CP: _brandish (a sword)_. hêafe b. _bewail_: _turn, wind,
revolve_.

bewindla (bi-) m. _hedge, border_, BC (Mdf).

bewitan swv., pres. 3 sg. -wât, pret. 3 sg. -wiste _to keep, care for,
watch over, superintend, administer, lead, guide_, Æ, AO.

bewitian (eo) _to observe, attend to, care for, administer_: _perform_.

bewlâtian _to look at, behold_, #LPs# 32^14.

bewlîtan^1 _to look round_, #Gen# 29^25.

bewôpen (pp. of bewêpan) _lamented_: _tearful, weeping_.

bewrecan^5 ¶ _to drive_: _drive away, banish_: _drive round, beat
round_.

bewrencan _to deceive_.

bewrêon^1,2 _to cover, hide, cover over, enwrap, protect, clothe_, _Sol,
Met_; CP. ['_bewry_']

bewreðian _to sustain, support_, #Rd# 81^21.

bewrîtan^1 _to record_? #Creat# 19: _score round_.

bewrîðan^1 ¶ _to bind, wind about, surround, envelop_.

bewrixl-an, -ian _to change_: _exchange, sell_, #PPs#.

bewuna adj. indecl. _accustomed, wont_, AO.

bewyddian = beweddian

bewýled = bewêled

bewyllan (= ie) _to boil away_, #Lcd#.

bewylwian _to roll down, roll together_.

bewýpð = bewêpð pres. 3 sg. of bewêpan.

bewyrcan _to work, construct, surround with, enclose, cover_, _B_; AO,
Æ: _work in, insert, adorn_, _Lcd_. ['_bework_']

bewyrpan = beweorpan

beyrfeweardian _to disinherit_, A 13·321.

beyrnan = beiernan

bezera = bæzere

bi, bî (1) = be (prep.); (2) f. = bêo

bi- v. also be-

bîad = bêod

biblioðêce f. biblioðeoco (AO) bibliðeca m. _library_: _bible_, _Æ_.
['_bibliotheca_' (_L._)]

bîbrêad = bêobrêad

bicce, bice f. '_bitch_,' _Lcd, WW_.

biccen = byccen

bicgan (Æ) = bycgan

bicge = bicce

±bîcn-an, -ian (ê, êa, îe, ý) _to make a sign_, _'beckon,' wink, nod_,
_Lk_; CP: _signify_: _summon_. [bêacn]  [[error for "bêacen"?]]

+bîcnend (ê), ±bicni(g)end m. _indicator, discloser_: _forefinger_.

bîcnendlic, +bîcni(g)endlic _allegorical_; (gram.) _indicative_, #ÆGr#
124^14.

bîcnol _indicating, indicative_, GPH 398^193.

±bîcnung (êa, ê) f. _beckoning, nodding_: _token, symbol, figure_, Æ:
_figurative speech_.

bîcwide m. _byword, proverb, fable, tale_, _Æ_. ['_bequeath_']

bîd n. _lingering, hesitation, delay, halt_, _Rd_. ['_bide_']

±bîdan^1 (intr.) _to stay, continue, live, remain, delay_, _AO, Ps_:
(tr. usu. w. g.) _wait for, await, expect_, _Bl, Mt_; AO, CP: _endure,
experience, find_: _attain, obtain_. ['_bide_']

biddan^5 _to ask, entreat, pray, beseech_, _AO, Bl_. b. and bêodan,
hâlsian _to beg and pray_: _order, command, require_, AO, CP. ['_bid_']

+biddan^5 (often refl.) _to beg, ask, pray_, _Bl, Mt_; Æ, CP: _worship_,
Æ, AO. ['_i-bid_']

biddere m. _petitioner_.

bidenfæt = bydenfæt

biderîp = bedrîp

bideð (CP) pres. 3 sg. of biddan.

bîdfæst ¶ _firm, forced to stand out_.

bîding f. _abiding place, abode_, #Gu# 180.

bîdsteall ¶ m. _halt, stand_.

bîe = bêo pres. 1 sg. of bêon.

bîecn = bêacen

bîecn- = bîcn-

bîegan (ê, î, ý) _to bend, turn, turn back, incline_, _Bo, Mk_:
_depress, abase, humiliate_: _subject_: _persuade, convert_: +býged
_bowed down, infirm_, #Nic# 471^29. ['_bey_,' bûgan]

bieldan (æ, e, i, y) _to encourage, excite, impel, exhort, confirm_,
_CP, Ma_; Æ, AO. ['_bield_'; beald]

bieldo (y^2) f. _boldness, courage, arrogance, confidence_, _BH_; CP.
['_bield_']

bielg = belg

bielw- = bilew-

bîeme (ê, i, ý) f. _trumpet_, _CP, WW_: _tablet, billet_. ['_beme_']

bîen = bêan

bîencoddas = bêancoddas  [[under "bêanbelgas"]]

+bierde = +byrde

+bierhtan (e, y) _to brighten, be or make bright, illuminate,
enlighten_, CP: _make clear_: _celebrate_. [beorht]

bierhtu (e, eo, i, y) f. _brightness, effulgence, brilliance_, CP.
[beorht]

bierm = bearm

biernan^3 (ea, eo, i, y) _to 'burn,' be on fire, give light_, _Æ, Lk,
Ex, VPs_.

biersteð, bierst pres. 3 sg. of berstan.

bierð pres. 3 sg. of beran.

biesen = bisen

biesgian = bysgian  [[redirected to "bisgian"]]

bieter- = biter-

bîetl (ê, î, ý) m. _'beetle,' mallet, hammer_, _CP, Jud_ (y).

bietr- = biter-

bîeð = bêoð pres. pl. of bêon.

bîfêran _to feed_, ES 41^324.

bifian _to tremble, be moved, shake, quake_, _Bo, Ps_; Æ. ['_bive_']

bifigendlic (byfg-) _terrible_, NC 274.

bifung f. _trembling, shaking_, Æ.

-bifung (eo^1) v. eorð-b.  [[under "eorðbeofung"]]

bîfylce n. _neighbouring people_. [folc]

big = be

big- = be-, bî-, bycg-

bîg- = bîeg-

bige = byge

+bîgednes f. _inflection, declension, case_, #ÆGr#.

bîgegnes = bîgengnes

bîgels m. _arch, vault_, Æ: _inclination_.

+bîgendlic _inflectional_, #ÆGr# 91^8.

+bîgendnes = +bîgednes

bîgeng f. _practice, exercise, observance, worship_, _Æ_: _cultivation_,
Æ. ['_bigeng_']

bîgenga m. _inhabitant_: _cultivator_, Æ: _worshipper_, Æ: _benefactor_.

bîgenge n. _practice, worship_.

bîgengere m. _worker_: _worshipper_.

bîgengestre f. _handmaiden, attendant, worshipper_, #Gl#.

bîgengnes, f. _application, study_.

+bigeð = +bygeð pres. 3 sg. of +bycgan.

bîging f. _bending_, WW 216^38.

bigleaf- (eo, i) = bîleof-

bîgnes f. _power of bending, bending_. [bîegan]

+bîgnes (ý) f. _frequented place, assembly_? #EPs# 117^27.

+bigð = +bigeð

bîgyrdel m. _girdle, belt, purse_, _Æ, Mt_: _treasury_. ['_bygirdle_']

bigytan = begietan

bihianda (_MtL_ 5^27) = behindan

bîhst = býhst pres. 2 sg. of bûgan.

+bihð f. _abode_? #Gu# 346. [cp. byht]

bil = bill

bilcettan = bealcettan  [[under "bealcan"]]

bildan = bieldan

+bilde _bold, brave_, Æ. [beald]

bile m. _'bill,' beak, trunk (of an elephant)_, _WW_: _prow_.

bîle = býle

bîlefa = bîleofa

bilehwît == bilewit

bîleofa (i^2) m., bîleofen f. _support, sustenance, food, nourishment_,
_Æ, WW_: _money, pay_. ['_bylive_'; libban]

bilêofian _to support, feed upon_, #Guth# 34^7.

bilewet == bilewit

bilewit _innocent, pure, simple, sincere, honest_, _BH, Mt_; Æ, CP:
_calm, gentle, merciful, gracious_: _plausible_. ['_bilewhit_'], adv.
-lîce.

bilewitnes f. _mildness, simplicity, innocence, purity_, Æ, CP.

bilgesleht = billgesliht

bilgst, bilhst pres. 2 sg. of belgan.

bilgð pres. 3 sg. of belgan.

bilherge = billere

bîlibb-, bîlif- = bîleof-

bilig = belg

biliw- = bilew-

bill n. _'bill,' chopper, battle-axe, falchion, sword_, _B, WW_.

billere m. _'bibulta' (plant)_, WW.

billgesliht n. _clashing of swords, battle_, ¶#Chr# 937.

billhete m. _murderous hate, strife_, #An# 78.

+bilod _having a bill or beak_. [bile]

bil-swæð n. (nap. -swaðu) _sword track, wound_, #Ex# 329.

bilw- = bilew-

bîlyht = býliht

bîma (m.?), bîme = bîeme

bin = binn

bînama m. _pronoun_, A 8·313.

+bind n. _binding, fetter_: _costiveness_.

±bindan sv^3 _to tie_, _'bind,' fetter, fasten, restrain_, _Æ, Bl, Mt,
Jn_; AO, CP: _adorn_.

binde f. _head-band_? _KC_ 6·133. ['_bind_']

bindele, -elle f. _binding_: _bandage_.

bindere m. '_binder_,' _Rd_ 28^6.

binding f. _binding_, OEG 324b.

binn, binne f. _'bin,' basket, crib, manger_, _Bl, LkL_.

binnan I. prep. (w. d. a.) _within, in, inside of, into_. II. adv.
_inside, within, less than, during, whilst_. ['_bin_']

binne = binn

bint pres. 3 sg. of bindan.

bio- = beo-, bi-

biosmrung = bismrung  [[redirected to "bismerung"]]

birce = beorc, beorce

bird (_LkLR_) = bridd

+bird = +byrd

birele = byrele

biren f. _she-bear_, OET (Ct).

birg == byrg

birgð, birhð pres. 3 sg. of beorgan.

birht- = bierht-

birig = byrig

birig- = byrg-

birihte (y) prep. w. d. _near, beside_, #An# 850.

birihto = bierhtu

birle = byrele

birnan = beornan

birst, birsteð pres. 3 sg. of berstan.

birst pres. 2 sg., bir(e)ð pres. 3 sg. of beran.

biryhte = birihte

bisæc n? m? _wallet_, MtR 10^10. [_L._ bisaccium]

bîsæc _contested, disputed_, LL.

bîs¯æc f. _visit_, #Gu# 188.

bisceop (o^2) m. '_bishop_,' _CP_: _high-priest, chief priest (of the
Jews)_, _heathen priest_, _AO, MkL_.

bisceopcyn (o^2) n. _episcopal (high-priestly) stock_.

bisceopdôm m. _episcopate, bishopric_: _ex-communication_.

bisceopealder m. _high priest_, HL.

bisceopfolgoð m. _episcopate_, GD 65^31.

bisceopgegyrelan mpl. _episcopal robes_, BH 90^2.

bisceophâd m. _'bishophood,' office of bishop, ordination as bishop,
episcopate, bishopric_, _CPPs_.

bisceophâdung f. _episcopal ordination_, ÆL 31^286.

bisceophâm m. _bishop's estate_, EC 365.

bisceophêafodlîn (o^2) n. _head ornament worn by bishops_, WW 152^23.

bisceophîred (o) m. _clergy subject to a bishop_.

bisceopian _to confirm_, _LL_. ['_bishop_']

bisceopland (o) n. _episcopal or diocesan land_, LL 173^10.

bisceoplic _'bishoply,' episcopal_, _BH_.

bisceoprîce n. _'bishopric,' diocese, province of a bishop_, _BH_.

bisceoprocc m. _bishop's rochet, dalmatic_, #Lcd# 3·202^26.

bisceoprôd f. _bishop's cross_.

bisceopscîr, -scýr f. _diocese_: _episcopate_.

bisceop-seld, -setl, -seðl n. _bishop's seat or see, bishopric_.

bisceopseonoð m. _synod of bishops_, A 11·8^1.

bisceopstôl m. _episcopal see, bishopric_, KC. ['_bishopstool_']

bisceopsunu m. _godson at a 'bishoping' or confirmation_.

bisceopðênung f. _office of a bishop_, BH.

bisceopung f. _confirmation_, Æ.

bisceopwîte n. _fine payable to a bishop_? (BT), _forced entertaining of
a bishop_? (Lieb: v. LL 2·667).

bisceopwyrt f. _bishop's-wort, betony, vervain, marshmallow_.

bisceopwyrtil (o^2) _vervain_, WW 134^41.

biscep == bisceop

bisceran = bescieran

biscerian (i^2, y^2) = bescierian

biscop == bisceop

biscup = bisceop

bisegu = bysgu  [[redirected to "bisgu"]]

bisen, bisene (y) fn. _example, pattern, model_, _JnLR_; Æ, AO, CP:
_similitude, parable, parallel_: _rule, command, precept_. ['_bysen_']

bîsene (y) _blind_, _MtL_; NC 274; JAW 22. ['_bisson_'?]

±bisenian (ie, y) _to give, set an example, instruct by example_, _Bo_:
_follow an example or pattern_, CP: _express figuratively_.
['_byen_' vb.]

bisenung f. _example, pattern_, Æ (y).

bises m. _the extra day intercalated in leap year_, #Men# 32. [_L._
bissextus]

±bisgian _to occupy, employ_, _Æ, Bo_; CP: _trouble, afflict_, _Lcd,
Met_. ['_busy_']

bisgu, bisigu f. _occupation, labour_, CP, Æ (yse): _affliction,
trouble_.

bisgung f. _business, occupation, care_, CP.

bisig (y) _'busy,' occupied, diligent_, _Ma, Sol_.

bisignes f. '_business_,' _MtL_ (Cont. p. xx).

bismær- = bismer-

bisme = besma

bismer (y) nmf. _disgrace, scandal, shame, mockery, insult, reproach,
scorn_, _AO, Bl_; CP: _filthiness, defilement_, Æ (y). tô bismere
_ignominiously, shamefully_: _blasphemy_: _infamous deed_, AO.
['_bismer_']

bismerful _infamous, disgraceful, ignominious, shameful_, Æ (y).

bismerglêow (y) n. _shameful lust_, Æ.

±bismerian (y) _to mock, revile, illtreat, blaspheme_, _Mk_; AO.
['_bismer_' vb.]

bismeriend m. _mocker_, #KGl# 298.

bismerlêas _blameless_, #Cr# 1326 (y).

bismerlêoð n. _scurrilous song_, #Gl#.

bismerlic _shameful, ignominious, contemptuous_, AO: _ridiculous,
frivolous_. adv. -lîce.

bismernes f. _pollution_; _insult_; _contemptibleness_.

bismer-spr¯æc, -sp¯æc f. _blasphemy_, G.

±bismerung (y) _mockery, scorn_: _blasphemy_: _infamy, disrepute_, AO.

bismerword (æ^2) n. _reproach, insult_, LL 10^11.

bismor = bismer

bism(o)r- = bismer-

bisn- = bisen-

+bisnere f. _imitator_, DR 45^7.

bîspell (big-) n. _example, proverb_, Æ: _parable, fable, allegory,
story_, _MtL_; CP. ['_byspel_']

bîspellbôc (big-) f. _book of Proverbs_, Æ.

bissextus, gen. -te _the intercalary day of leap year_: _leap year_.
[_L._]

bist pres. 2 sg. of bêon.

bîst = bîdst, pres. 2 sg. of bîdan.

biswic = beswic

bit pres. 3 sg. of biddan.

bît pres. 3 sg. of (1) bîdan; (2) bîtan.

bita m. I. _'bit,' morsel, piece_, _Jn_; Æ. II. _biter, wild beast_.

±bîtan^1 _to 'bite,' tear_, _B, Rd_; Æ: _cut, wound_: (+) _dash down_,
MkL 9^18.

bite m. _'bite,' sting_, _AO, Lcd_: _sword-cut_, _Ap, B_: _cancer_.

bitela m. '_beetle_,' _Gl_.

biter _'bitter,' sharp, cutting_, _Gu_; Æ: _stinging_, #PPs# 117^12:
_exasperated, angry, embittered_: _painful, disastrous, virulent,
cruel_, _B, Bl_. adv. -lîce, _Mt_.

bitere = bitre

±biterian _to be or become bitter_, CP: _make bitter_. ['_bitter_' vb.]

biternes f. _'bitterness,' grief_, _El_; Æ, CP.

biterwyrde _bitter in speech_, Æ.

biterwyrtdrenc m. _drink of bitter herbs_, WW 114^18.

bîtl = bîetl

bitm¯ælum _piecemeal, bit by bit_, #ÆGr# 239^10.

bitol n. _bridle_.

bîtol m. _beetle_ (insect). [bîtan]  [[from first edition]]

bitor = biter

bitre _bitterly, sharply, painfully, severely_: _very_.

bitres, bittres gsmn. of biter.

bitst pres. 2 sg. of biddan.

bîtst pres. 2 sg. of bîdan and bîtan.

bitt I. pres. 3 sg. of (1) biddan; (2) beodan. II. = bytt

bîtt pres. 3 sg. of bîtan.

+bitt n. _biting, gnashing_, Æ.

bitter == biter

bittor = biter

bittre = bitre

bitula = bitela

bið pres. 3 sg. of bêon.

biwâune v. bewâwan.

bîwist fm. _sustenance, food, provision, necessaries_, _Bo_, Æ.
['_bewiste_']

bîword (u) n. _proverb, household word_: _adverb_, A 8·313^7.

bîwyrde n. _'byword,' proverb_, _WW_.

bixen = byxen

bizant m. _bezant (a gold coin)_. [_L._ byzanteum]

blâc I. (¯æ) _bright, shining, glittering, flashing_, _Rd_: _pale,
pallid, wan_, AO, CP. [blîcan; _'bleak,' to 'bleach'_] II. pret. 3 sg.
of blîcan.

blac = blæc

blâcern n. _lamp, candle, light_, CP (¯æ).

blâchlêor ¶ _with pale cheeks_.

blâcian _to turn pale_, Æ.

blâcung f. _a turning pale, pallor_, Æ.

bladesian _to flame, blaze, be hot_: _emit an odour_, OEG 554.

bladesnung (at-) f. _odour_, WW 405^1.

bladesung (at-, æt-) f. _shining, lightning_, #EPs# 76^19.

blæc (a) I. _'black' dark_, _B, BH, Æ_. II. n. _ink_, _LL, WW_.
['_bleck_']

bl¯æc == blâc

bl¯æcan _to bleach, whiten_. [blâc]

blæcce f. _black matter_, OEG 652.

bl¯æce n.? _irritation of the skin, leprosy_, #Lcd#.

bl¯æcernleoht (â) n. _lantern-light_.

blæcfexede _black-haired_, ÆH 1·456^16. [feax]

blæcgymm m. _jet_, BH 26^16.

blæchorn (e) n. _ink-horn_, IM 128^18.

bl¯æco f. _pallor_, #Lcd#.

blæcpytt m. _bleaching-pit_? EC 383´.

bl¯æcðrustfel n. _leprosy_, Cp 103#b#.

blæd n. (nap. bladu) '_blade_,' WW: _leaf_, _Gen_.

bl¯æd (ê) I. m. _blowing, blast_: _inspiration_, Æ: _breath, spirit_, Æ:
_life, mind_: _glory, dignity, splendour_: _prosperity, riches,
success_. II. = blêd I.

bl¯ædâgende _renowned_, B 1013.

bl¯ædbylig m. _bellows_, WW 241^33.

bl¯æddæg ¶ m. _day of prosperity_.

blædderwærc m. _pain in the bladder_, #Lcd#.

blæddre = bl¯ædre

±bl¯ædfæst ¶ _glorious, prosperous_.

+bl¯ædfæstnes f. _provision, sustenance_, ÆL 23b^492.

bl¯ædgifa ¶ m. _giver of prosperity_.

bl¯ædhorn m. _trumpet_, Æ.

bl¯ædnes f. _blossom, fruit_, A 8·311. [blêd]

bl¯ædre (ê) f. _blister, pimple_, AO: '_bladder_,' _Lcd_. [blâwan]

bl¯ædwela m. _abundant riches_, #Cr# 1392.

bl¯æge f. _gudgeon, bleak_, WW. ['_blay_']

blægettan (a) _to cry_, GD 278^12.

bl¯æh¯æwen _light blue_.

bl¯æs = bl¯æst

bl¯æsbelg (OET 28) = bl¯æstbelg

blæse (a) f. _firebrand, torch, lamp_, _Æ, Jn_. ['_blaze_']

blæsere m. _incendiary_, LL.

bl¯æshorn m. _blowing-horn, trumpet_, LL 194 (8).

bl¯æst m. _blowing, 'blast' (of wind), breeze_, _Ex_: _flame_.

bl¯æstan _to blow_, #Andr# 123^30: _rush_? (v. BT).

bl¯æstbelg m. _bellows_, #Gl#.

bl¯æstm m? _flame, blaze_, MFH 90^7.

bl¯ætan _to 'bleat,'_ _ÆGr, Rd_.

blætesung = bladesung

bl¯æts- = blêts-

bl¯æwen = bl¯æh¯æwen

bl¯æwest, bl¯æwst pres. 2 sg., bl¯æw(e)ð pres. 3 sg. of blâwan.

blagettan = blægettan

blan pret. 3 sg. of blinnan.

blanca ¶ m. _(white?) horse_, _B_. ['_blonk_']

±bland n. _blending, mixture, confusion, turmoil_.

±blandan^7 ¶ _to blend, mix, mingle_, _Rd_. ['_bland_']

blandenfeax ¶ _grizzly-haired, grey-haired, old_. [blandan]

blann pret. 3 sg. of blinnan.

blase = blæse

blasere = blæsere

blâstbelg = bl¯æstbelg

blaster = plaster

blât ¶ _livid, pale, wan, ghastly_: _low, hoarse (sound)_? #An# 1279.
[cp. blêat]

blâtan _to be livid, pale_.  [[from first edition]]

blâte ¶ _lividly, pallidly_, #Met#.

blatesnung = bladesnung

blâtian _to be livid, pale_, #Gen# 981 (GK).

±blâwan^7 (ô) (tr. or intr.) _to 'blow,' breathe_, _Mt, Lk, Jn_: _be
blown, sound_: _inflate_: (+) _kindle, inflame_, WW 208^14: (+) _spit_,
MkLR 7^33.

blâwend m. _inspirer_, ÆH 2·478^8.

blâwere m. '_blower_,' CP.

blâwung f. _'blowing,' blast_, _Æ_: _inflation_.

bleac = blæc

blêat _miserable_? _Gu_ 963. ['_blete_']. adv. blêate, B 2824.

blêað _gentle, shy, cowardly, timid_, _Rd_: _slothful, inactive,
effeminate_, AO. ['_blethe_'; _Ger._ blöde]

blec == blæc

blêce = bl¯æce

blêcða '_vitiligo_,' WW 53^28.

bled = blæd

blêd- = blêt-

blêd I. (¯æ) f. _shoot, branch, flower, blossom, leaf, foliage, fruit_,
_Mt, Lcd_; CP: _harvest, crops_. ['_blede_'; blôwan] II. = bl¯æd I.

blêdan _to 'bleed,' let blood_, _Sol_.

blêdhwæt _growing quickly or profusely_? #Rd# 2^9.

blêdre = bl¯ædre

bledu f. _dish, bowl, goblet_, Æ.

blegen, blegne f. _'blain,' boil, blister, ulcer_, _Lcd_.

blencan _to deceive, cheat_, _Mod_. ['_blench_']

blênd (e) pret. 3 sg. of blandan.

blend-an, -ian _to blind, deprive of sight_, _Bo_: _deceive_.
['_blend_']

blendnes f. _blindness_, DR 38^5.

blent pres. 3 sg. of (1) blendan, (2) blandan.

±blêo n. gs. blêos, ds. blêo, gp. blêo(na), dip. blêom, blêo(w)um
_colour_, _Bo_; CP: _appearance, form_, _Sol_. ['_blee_']

blêobord ¶ n. _coloured board, chess-board_.

blêobrygd n? _combination of colours, scintillation_, #Ph# 292.
[bregdan]

blêocræft m. _art of embroidery_, WW 354^9.

+blêod _beautiful_, #Cr# 909.

bleodu = bledu

blêofæstnes f. '_deliciæ_,' #RPs# 138^11.

blêofâg _variegated_, #Gl#.

blêoh = blêo

blêomete m. _dainty food_, GD 99^18.

blêona gp. of blêo.

blêorêad _purple_, WW.

blêost¯æning f. _tesselated pavement_, WW 444^10.

blêot pret. 3 sg. of (1) blâtan, (2) blôtan.

bleoum dip. of blêo.

blêow pret. 3 sg. of (1) blâwan, (2) blôwan.

blêowum dp. of blêo.

blere, blerig _bald_, WW.

blese = blæse

blêt pret. 3 sg. of (1) blâtan, (2) blôtan.

blêtan = bl¯ætan

±blêtsian _to consecrate, ordain_, _Mt, JnL_ (oe): _'bless,' give
thanks, adore, extol_, _Da, Ps, Lk_: _sign with the cross_, Æ:
_pronounce or make happy_, Æ. [blôd]

blêtsingbôc f. _blessing-book, benedictional_, EC 250.

blêtsingsealm m. _the Benedicite_, RB 36^18.

blêtst pres. 2 sg. of blôtan.

blêtsung f. _consecration_, _Chr_: _'blessing,' benediction_, _Chr_; Æ:
_favour (of God)_, #Bl, VPs#.

blêw = blêow pret. 3 sg. of blâwan.

blêwð pres. 3 sg. of blôwan.

blîcan^1 _to glitter, shine, gleam, sparkle, dazzle_, _Sol_: _appear_,
#Sol# 144. ['_blik_']

bliccettan _to glitter, quiver_, #Gl#.

bliccettung f. _glittering, shining_, #VPs#.

blice m. _exposure_, LL 5[34].

blicgan = blycgan

blîcian _to shine_, OEG 1499.

blîcð pres. 3 sg. of blîcan.

blîds = bliss

blin imperat. of blinnan.

blind '_blind_,' _Mk_; CP, Æ: _dark, obscure, opaque_, _DD_; Æ:
_internal, not showing outwardly_: _unintelligent_: _not stinging_, WW
322^29. adv. -lîce _blindly, rashly_, AO.

blindboren _born blind_, JnL 9^32.

+blinfellian _to blind, blindfold_, HL ^276.

-blindian v. of-b.

blindnes f. _blindness_, Æ.

blinn ¶ n? _cessation_.

±blinnan^3 _to cease, leave off, rest from_, _Mt_; CP: _lose, forfeit_:
_be vacant (bishopric)_. ['_blin_'; be, linnan]

blinnes f. _cessation, intermission_, LL.

blis (CP) = bliss

blisa = blysa

bliscan = blyscan

blisgere m. _incendiary_. [blysige]

bliss m. _'bliss,' merriment, happiness_, _Bl_; CP: _kindness,
friendship, grace, favour_, _Met_: _cause of happiness_, _Ps_. [blîðe]

±blissian (intr.) _to be glad, rejoice, exult_, _CP, Lk_; Æ: (tr.) _make
happy, gladden, endow_, ¶_Hy_: _applaud_, ANS 109·306. ['_bliss_']

blissig _joyful_, #RPs# 112^9.

blissigendlic _exulting_, ÆH 1·354^11.

blissung f. _exultation_, #EPs# 64^13.

blîð == blîðe

blîðe I. _'blithe,' joyous, cheerful, pleasant_, Æ, AO, CP: _gracious,
well-disposed, friendly, kind_, _El_: _agreeable, willing_: _quiet,
peaceful, gentle_, _Ps_: (+b. occurs at #Guth# 161^9). II. adv. _Ps_.

blîðelic _gentle, pleasant, glad_. adv. -lîce (_Lk_). ['_blithely_']

blîðemôd _glad, cheerful_: _well-wishing, friendly_.

blîðheort ¶ _happy, joyful_: _gracious_.

+blîðian _to make glad_, #RPs# 91^4.

blîðnes f. _joy, gladness, pleasure_, _Lcd_; AO. ['_blitheness_']

blîðs == bliss

blîwum = blêo(w)um, dp. of blêo.

blod = bold

blôd n. '_blood_,' _Æ, G, Lcd_; AO, CP: _vein_.

blôd-dolg, -dolh n. _bleeding wound_, #Lcd#.

blôddryne m. _bloodshed_, AO 162^3.

blôdegesa m. _bloody horror_, #Ex# 477.

+blôdegian = blôdgian

blôden _bloody_, WW 217^35?

blôdfâg ¶ _blood-stained, bloody_.

blôdgemang n. _a blood-mixture_, WW 220^7.

blôdgemenged _blood-stained_, W 182^11.

blôdgêot = blôdgýte  [[headword spelled "blôdgyte"]]

blôdgêotend m. _shedder of blood_, #LPs# 50^16.

blôdgêotende _bloody_, #LPs# 5^8.

±blôdgian _to be bloodthirsty_, WW 215^43: _make bloody_.

blôdgyte m. _bloodshed_, AO.

blôdhr¯æcung f. _spitting of blood_, WW 113^6.

blôdhrêow _sanguinary, cruel_, #Ps#.

blôdig '_bloody_,' _WW_; AO.

blôdigtôð _bloody-toothed_, B 2083.

blôd-l¯æs, -læswu f. _blood-letting, bleeding_.

blôdl¯æstîd f. _time for blood-letting_, #Lcd# 55a.

blôdl¯ætere m. _blood-letter_, WW.

blôdlêas _bloodless_, #ÆGr# 56^14.

blôd-orc, -mônað = blôtorc, etc.

blôdrêad _blood-red_.

blôdrêow = blôdhrêow

blôdryne m. _issue of blood, bloody flux_: _bursting of a blood-vessel_,
AO 288^27.

blôdsæx (e) n. _lancet_, #Gl#.

blodscêawung f. _supply of blood_? (BT) #Lcd# 83a.

blôdseten _something to stop bleeding_, #Lcd#.

blôdsihte f. _flowing of blood_, #Lcd# 64a.

blôdðigen f. _tasting of blood_, LL.

blôdwîte n. _blood-offering_, #LPs# 15^4.

blôdyrnende _having an issue of blood_, BH 78^16#b#.

blôma m. _lump of metal, mass_, #Gl#.

blon pret. 3 sg. of blinnan.

blonca = blanca

blond- = bland-

blonn pret. 3 sg. of blinnan.

blôsa, blôsma = blôstma  [[under "blôstm"]]

blôstb¯ære = blôstmb¯ære

blôstm (Æ), blôstma mf. _'blossom,' flower, fruit_, _Bl, Lcd_.

blôstmb¯ære (Æ), -b¯ærende _flower-bearing_.

blôstmfrêols m. _floral festival_, OEG 4720.

blôstmian _to 'blossom,' bloom_, BH.

±blôt n. _sacrifice_, AO. [blôd]

blôt- = blôd-

blôtan^7 (and ? wv) _to sacrifice, kill for sacrifice_, AO, CP.

blôtere m. _sacrificer_, GPH 398^99.

blôtmônað m. _month of sacrifice_ (8 Oct.-8 Nov.), _November_.

blôtorc m. _sacrificial vessel_, GPH 397.

blôtspîung f. _spitting of blood_, WW 113^7.

blôtung f. _sacrifice_, AO 102^16.

±blôwan I. sv^7 _to 'blow,' flower, flourish, blossom_, _Lcd_. II. =
blâwan

blôwendlic _blooming_, WW 240^28.

blunnen pp., blunnon pret. pl. of blinnan.

-blycgan v. â-b.

blys, blyss = bliss

blysa m. _firebrand, torch_, Æ.

blyscan '_rutilare_,' #HGl# 434^75 (v. OEG 1196 and '_blush_').

blyse f. = blysa

blysere = blæsere

blysian _to burn, blaze_, #PPs# 17^8.

blysige = blyse

blyssian (Æ) = blissian

blýðe = blîðe

blýðelîce = blîðelîce

bô = bâ, nafn. of bêgen.

bôc I. fn. ds. and nap. bêc _'beech_'-_tree_, _WW_; Mdf: _beech-nut_, NC
274: '_book,' writing, Bible_, _Bl, Jn, CP_; AO, Æ. Crîstes b. _gospel_:
_deed, charter, conveyance_, _LL_. II. pret. 3 sg. of bacan.

bôcæceras mpl. _freehold lands_.

bôcblæc (e) n. _ink_, W 225^1.

bôcce = bêce

bôc-cest, -cist(e) f. _book-chest_.

bôccræft m. _learning_, _Bo_. ['_bookcraft_']

bôccræftig _book-learned_.

bôcere m. _scholar, scribe, writer_, Æ.

bôcfell n. _parchment, vellum_, _LL_. ['_bookfell_']

bôcfôdder n. _bookcase_, WW 194^13.

bôcgesamnung f. _library_, WW 203^16.

bôcgestrêon n. _library_, BH.

bôchord n. _library_, _WW_. ['_bookhoard_']

bôchûs n. _library_, WW 185^35.

±bôcian _to grant by charter_: _supply with books_.

bôclæden n. _literary Latin, learned language_.

bôcland n. _land held by written title_, _LL_; Æ, AO. v. LL 2·323.
['_bookland_']

bôclâr f. _book-lore, learning_.

bôcleden = bôclæden

bôclic _of or belonging to a book_, Æ: _biblical, scriptural_. b. stæf
'_ars liberalis_,' #HGl# 503.

bôcon pret. pl. of bacan.

bôcr¯ædere m. _reader of books_, WW 439^25.

bôcr¯æding f. _reading of books_, WW.

bôcrêad _red colour used in illuminating manuscripts, vermilion_, WW.

bôcrêde f. _reading of books_, A 10·143^101.

bôcriht n. _right given by will or charter_, LL 444 (1).

bôcscyld m. _beech-wood shield_, TC 561^5.

bôcstæf m. nap. -stafas _letter, character_, _El_. ['_bocstaff_'; _Ger._
buchstabe]

bôcstigel f. _beech-wood stile_, KC 5·70^25.

bôc-t¯æcung, -talu f. _teaching or narrative, written in books_, LL.

bôctrêow n. _beech-tree_, Æ.

bôcweorc n. _study of books_, LL (314^18).

bôcwudu m. _beech-wood_, #Rd# 41^106.

±bod (+ exc. N) n. _command, message, precept_, _Bo, Hy_; Æ:
_preaching_. ['_bode_,' '_i-bod_'; _Ger._ gebot]

boda m. _messenger, herald, apostle, angel_, Æ, CP: _prophet_.
['_bode_'; _Ger._ bote]

bodan = botm

bode pret. of bôgan.

bodeg = bodig

boden pp. of bêodan.

bodere m. _teacher_, NG.

±bodian _to tell, proclaim, announce_, ¶_Hy_; AO, CP: _preach_, _Mt_; Æ,
CP: _foretell_, _El_: _boast_. ['_bode_']

bodiend m. _proclaimer, teacher, preacher_.

bodig n. _'body,' trunk, frame, bodily presence_, _Æ, BH_, _etc._, CP:
_main part_, #Lcd#.

bodigendlic _to be celebrated_, ÆL 7·232.

bodlâc n. _decree, ordinance_, #Chr# 1129.

±bodscipe ¶ m. _command_: _message_.

bodung f. _message, recital, preaching_, Æ: _interpretation_:
_assertiveness_, RB 136^22.

bodungdæg m. _Annunciation Day_, ÆH 1·200^26.

bôg m. _arm, shoulder_, _Æ_; CP: _'bough,' twig, branch_, _Mt_; CP:
_offspring_. [bûgan]

boga m. _'bow,' (weapon)_, _Gn_; Æ: _arch, arched place, vault_, _B_:
_rainbow_, _Æ_: _folded parchment_. [cp. _Ger._ bogen]

bôga = bôg

bôgan _to boast_, RB.

boganet = bogenett

bogefôdder m. _quiver_, WW 143^19.

bogen I. _name of a plant_, #Lcd#. II. pp. of bûgan.

bogenett n. _wicker basket with a narrow neck for catching fish_, WW.

bogetung f. _curve_, WW 355^15.

bôgh = bôg

bôgian I. ±(intr.) _to dwell_, _Æ_: (tr.) _to inhabit_. II. = bôgan

bogiht _full of bends_, MtL 7^14.

bôgincel n. _small bough_, OEG.

bôgung (bôung) f. _boastfulness, arrogance, display_, Æ.

bôh = bôg

bôhscyld m. _shoulder shield_, EC 226´.

bohte pret. 3 sg. of bycgan.

bôhtimber n. _building timber_, AS 1^3. [bôgian, ES 42·172]

bôlan = bôgan

bol? m. _bole, trunk_, #Lcd# 143a.

bolca m. _gangway of a ship_.

bold (= botl) n. _house, dwelling-place, mansion, hall, castle_, _B_:
_temple_. ['_bold_']

boldâgend ¶ m. _homestead-owner_.

boldgestrêon (botl) ¶ _household goods_.

boldgetæl _collection of houses_: _(political) district, county,
province_, GD.

boldgetimbru ¶ npl. _houses_.

boldweard (botl-) m. _housekeeper, steward_, Æ.

boldwela ¶ m. _wealth_: _splendid dwelling, paradise, heaven_:
_village_, #Gen# 1799. (botl-)

bolgen pp. of belgan.

bolgenmôd ¶ _enraged_.

bolla m., bolle f. _'bowl,' cup, pot, beaker, measure_, _ÆL, Jn, Lcd_.

bolster mn. _'bolster,' head-pillow, cushion_, _B_; CP.

+bolstrian _to support with pillows, prop up_, A 8·308.

bolt m. '_bolt_': _cross-bow for throwing bolts or arrows_, _WW_.

bolttimber n. _building timber_, AS 1^3. [botl; v. ES 42^172]

bôn I. f. _ornament_, #Chr# 1063#d#. II. = bôgan

bon- = ban-

bond- = band-

bônda m. _householder_, _LL_: _freeman, plebeian_; _husband_. ['_bond_']

bôndeland n. _land held by a_ bônda, #Chr# 777#e#. [_ON._ bôndi]

bône = bên

+bônian _to polish, burnish_, TC. [_Ger._ bohnen]

bonn == bann

bor _borer, gimlet_, #Gl#: _lancet, scalpel, graving tool_, #Gl#.
[borian]

bora m. _ruler_, #Sat# 500. [? r¯ædbora]

borcen pret. 3 sg. of beorcan.

borcian _to bark_.

bord n. _'board,' plank_, _Æ, Gen_: _table_, _Ps_: _side of a ship_,
_Gen_: _ship_, _El, Gn_: _shield_, #El#.

borda m. _embroidery, ornament_, #Gl#.

bordclâð m. _table-cloth_, OEG 56^22.

bordgelâc n. _weapon, dart_, #Cr# 769.

bordhæbbende _shield-bearing_, B 2895.

bordhaga m. _cover of shields_, #El# 652.

bordhrêoða (ê) ¶ m. _shield-ornament_: _phalanx_.

bordrand m. _shield_, B 2559.

bordrima m. _rim, edge_.

bordriðig _a stream running in a channel made of planks_? (BT), EC
450^11.

bordstæð n. _sea-shore_, #An# 442.

bordðaca m. _shield-covering, testudo_, #Gl#: _board for roofing_, WW.

bordweall m. _wall of shields, phalanx_: _buckler, shield_: _side of
ship_, #Rd# 34^6.

bordwudu m. _shield_, B 1243.

boren pp. of beran.

borettan _to brandish_, #Gl#.

borg m. _pledge, security, bail, debt, obligation_, _LL_ (v. 2·331;
641); CP: _bondsman_: _debtor_. ['_borrow_' sb.]

borgbryce m. _breach of surety_, LL.

borgen pp. of beorgan.

borggelda m. _borrower_: _lender_.

borgian _to 'borrow,'_ _Mt, Ps_: _lend_: _be surety for_, OEG 3812.

borgiend m. _lender, usurer_.

borg-sorg (burg-) f. _trouble on account of lending or security_,
#Rim# 63.

borgwedd n. _pledge_, WW 279^16.

borh == borg

borhfæst _fast bound_, HL 18^254.

±borhfæstan _to bind by pledge or surety_.

borhhand fm. _security, surety (person)_, Æ.

borhlêas _without a pledge, without security_, LL 230[5].

borian _to bore, perforate_.

borlîce _very, extremely, fitly, excellently_, A 8·302, 307, 329.

born = barn, pret. 3 sg. of biernan.

+borsnung = +brosnung

borsten pp. of berstan.

borðor = beorðor

bôsig m? n? _stall, crib_, _LkLR_. ['_boosy_']

bôsm (CP), bôsum m. _'bosom,' breast, womb_, _Æ_: _surface_, _An_:
_ship's hold_, _Gen_.

bôsmig _sinuous_, OEG 8^2.

bôt f. _help, relief, advantage, remedy_, _An, Da, Lcd_; AO:
_compensation for an injury or wrong_, _LL_ (v. 2·336): _(peace)
offering, recompense, amends, atonement, reformation, penance,
repentance_, _Bl_; CP. tô bôte _to 'boot,' besides, moreover_. [_Ger._
busse]

bôtan = bêtan

bôtettan _to improve, repair_.

botian _to get better_.

±botl (CP, Æ) == bold

bôtlêas _unpardonable, not to be atoned for by_ bôt.

botm m. _'bottom,' ground, foundation_, _B, WW_: _abyss_, _Gen_.

bôtwyrðe _pardonable, that can be atoned for by_ bôt. [cp. bôtlêas]

bôð = bôgeð pres. 3 sg. of bôgan.

boðen mn? _rosemary_: _darnel_, Æ: _thyme_, GPH 390.

bôung = bôgung

box mn. _box-tree_, _WW_: _'box,' case_, _Mt_. [_L._ buxus]

boxtrêow n. _box-tree_, #ÆGr# 20^19.

braccas mp. _breeches_, #Lcd# 3·198^28. [_L._]

bracce (Mdf) = bræc I.

brachwîl f. _moment_, A 8·318.

-bracian v. â-b.

brâd I. comp. brâdra, br¯ædra _'broad,' flat, open, extended, spacious,
wide_, _Gen, Chr_; Æ, AO, CP: _ample, copious_, _B_; #El#. II. n.
_breadth_, #Rim# 13?

brâdæx f. _broad axe_, #Gl#.

brâdbrim ¶ n. _wide sea_.

brâde _far and wide, broadly, widely_.

brâdelêac n. _leek_, #Gl#.

brâdhand f. _palm of the hand_, WW 264^34.

brâdian _to extend, reach_, AO 234^10.

brâdlâstæx f. _broad axe_, #Gl#.

brâdlinga _flatly, with the hand open_.

brâdnes sf. _breadth, greatness, extent, surface_, Æ: _liberality_.

brâdpanne = br¯ædepanne

bræc I. _a strip of unfilled land_? (BT), KC. II. = pret. 3 sg. of
brecan.

br¯æc I. (±) n. _catarrh, cough_. II. f. _breaking, destruction_, ÆL
5^292. III. = brêc nap. of brôc I.

bræcce _breeches_, OET. [_L._]

br¯æccoðu f. _falling sickness, epilepsy_, WW 112^27.

+br¯æceo = br¯æc I.

br¯æcdrenc (ê) _cough medicine_, WW 351^88.

bræclian _to cackle, make a noise_, GD 236^12.

br¯æcon pret. pl. of brecan.

±br¯æcsêoc _epileptic, lunatic_.

br¯æd I. f. _breadth, width_, AO. [brâd] II. f. _flesh_, #Ph# 240.
[_OHG._ brât] III. m. _trick, fraud, deceit, craft_. [= *brægd;
'_braid_'] IV. pret. 3 sg. of brêdan, bregdan. V. pres. 3 sg. and pp. of
br¯ædan.

br¯æd- = brægd- (bregd-)

±br¯ædan (e) I. _to make broad, extend, spread, stretch out_, _BH_; AO:
_be extended, rise, grow_. ['_brede_'; brâd] II. _to roast, toast, bake,
broil, cook_, _WW_. ['_brede_'; _Ger._ braten]

br¯æde m. _roast meat_, _WW_. ['_brede_'; _Ger._ braten]

-br¯ædels v. ofer-b.

br¯ædepanne f. _frying-pan_ (v. WW 363#n#3).

br¯æding I. f. _extension_, #Bo# 46^6: _bedding, bed_, DR. II. f. _roast
meat_, OEG 3760.

br¯ædingpanne = br¯ædepanne

br¯ædîsen n. '_scalpellum_,' #Gl#, WW.

br¯ædra v. brâd.

br¯ædu, br¯ædo f. _breadth, width, extent_, _Ps_. ['_brede_']

+brægd = br¯æd III.

brægdan = bregdan

brægdboga m. _deceitful bow_, #Cr# 765.

brægden (e) I. (±) _deceitful, crafty_, AO. adv. -lîce. [bregdan] II.
_fraud_.

brægdnes (¯æd-) f. _fraud, cunning_.

brægdwîs _crafty_, #Gu# 58. [bregd]

brægen (a, c) n. '_brain_,' _Lcd, Ps_; Æ, CP.

brægenpanne f. _brain-pan, skull_, OEG 2815.

brægensêoc _brain-sick, mad_, OEG.

brægn = brægen

brægnloca (brægn-) m. _brain-house, head_, #Rd# 72^21.

brægpanne = brægenpanne

bræhtm (A) = breahtm

bræmbel, br¯æmel == brêmel

br¯æme (NG) = brême

br¯ær (ê) = brêr

bræs n. _'brass,' bronze_, _Æ_.

bræsen _'brazen,' of brass_, _LPs_; Æ.

bræsian _to do work in brass, make of brass_, #ÆGr# 215^17.

bræsne = bresne

br¯æð m. _odour, scent, stink, exhalation, vapour_, _AO_. ['_breath_']

br¯æw (êa) m. _eye-brow, eye-lid_, _BH, Lcd, Ps, WW_; CP. ['_bree_']

bragen = brægen

brahtan = brohton pret. pl. of bringan.

brand (ô) m. _fire, flame_, _B_; Æ: _'brand,' torch_, _JnL, Da_; Æ:
_sword_, _B_.

brandhât ¶ _burning hot, ardent_.

brandhord (o^1) n? _treasure exciting ardent desires_ (BT); _care,
anxiety_ (GK), #Rim# 46.

brand-îren, -îsen n. _fire-dog, trivet, grate_, _WW_. ['_brandise_']

brandôm (o^1) m. '_rubigo_,' WW 44^14.

brandrâd (o^2, e^2) f. _fire-dog, trivet_, #Gl#.

brandrida m. _fire-grate_, WW 266^26.

brandstæfn (o^1) _high-prowed_? #An# 504. [= brant- ?]

brang pret. 3 sg. of bringan.

brant ¶ (o) _deep, steep, high_, _An, El_. ['_brant_']

branwyrt f. _whortleberry plant_, WW 133^23.

brasian = bræsian

+brastl (-sl) n. _crackling (of flames)_, DD, W.

brastlian (-sl) _to roar, rustle, crackle_, _Æ_. ['_brastle_'; _Ger._
prasseln]

brastlung f. _crackling, rustling, crashing_, _Æ_.

bratt m. _cloak_, _MtL_ 5^40. ['_bratt_']

brêac pret. 3 sg. of brûcan.

brêad n. _bit, crumb, morsel_: '_bread_,' _JnL_.

+breadian = +bredian

brêag = br¯æw

breahtm I. (bearhtm; æ, e, eo, y) m. _cry, noise, revelry_. II. =
bearhtm

breahtmian (earht) _to creak, resound_.

breahtmung f. '_convolatus_,' WW 376^3.

breahtumhwæt = bearhtmhwæt

breard = brerd

brêat- = brêot-

brêað _brittle_, #Lcd# 1·260^7.

brêaw = br¯æw

brêawern n. _brew-house_, WW 145^29.

brêc fp. _breeches_, _Lcd, RB_. ['_breech_'; v. ES 38·345]

+brec n. _noise, sound_, CP.

±brêc = ±br¯æc I.

±brecan I. sv^4 _to 'break,' shatter, burst, tear_, _B, Bl, Ps_:
_curtail, injure, violate, destroy, oppress_, _B, Da, KC_; AO, CP:
_break into, rush into, storm, capture (city)_, _Ma_; CP: _press,
force_: _break or crash through, burst forth, spring out_, _An, Ph_:
_subdue, tame_, CP. II. _to roar_? #Cr# 951. [_ON._ braka]

brêchrægl n. _breeches_, #PPs# 108^28.

brecm¯ælum = brytm¯ælum

±brecnes f. _breach_, #EPs#.

-brecð v. ¯æ-, eodor-b.

brecða m. _broken condition_. môdes b. _sorrow of heart_, B 171.

brecung f. '_breaking_,' _LkR_.

bred n. _surface_: _board, plank_, CP: _tablet_, _Æ_. ['_bred_']

brêd = (1) brýd, (2) brâd, (3) br¯æd III.

brêdan I. _to produce, or cherish, a brood_, _Æ_. ['_breed_'] II. (±) =
bregdan. III. (±) = br¯ædan I. and II.

breden (i, y) _of boards, wooden_, Æ.

brêdende _deceitful, cunning_, AO. [bregdan]

brêdettan = brogdettan

+bredian ¶ (ea) _to regenerate, restore_.

brêdi(ng)panne = br¯ædepanne

brêdîsern = br¯ædîsen

bredweall m. _wall of boards, palisade_, ES 20·148.

bredwian (eo) _to strike down, trample_.

+brêfan _to write down_, A 8·308^11. [cp. _Ger._ brief]

brêg (#VPs#) = br¯æw

brega (Æ) = brego

brêgan _to alarm, frighten, terrify_, _Lk_; Æ, CP. ['_bree_'; brôga]

bregd = br¯æd III.

+bregd I. n. _movement, change_, #Ph# 57. II. = br¯æd III.

bregdan^3 (brêd-) _to move quickly, pull, shake, swing, throw
(wrestling)_, _draw (sword)_, _drag_, _B, Ma_: _bend, weave_, _'braid,'
knit, join together_, _ÆGr_: _change colour, vary, be transformed_, _Ex,
Sol, Gu_: _bind, knot_: (intr.) _move, be pulled_: _flash_, Æ. up b.
_bring up (a charge)_: (+) _scheme, feign, pretend_: (+) _draw breath,
breathe_.

bregden = brægden

+bregdnes f. _trouble, affliction_, MF 162.

+bregdstafas mp. _learned arts_, #Sol# 2.

bregen = brægen

brêgendlic _terrible_, #RPs# 46^3.

brêgh = br¯æw

brêgnes f. _fear, terror_.

brego ¶ (eo) m. _ruler, chief, king, Lord_. b. engla, mancynnes _God_.

bregorîce n. _kingdom_, #Gen# 1633.

bregorôf _majestic, mighty_, B 1925.

bregostôl ¶ m. _ruler's seat, throne_: _rule, dominion_.

bregoweard ¶ m. _ruler, prince, lord_.

bregu = brego

breht- = breaht-, beorht-, bierht-

brehtniende = bearhtmiende  [[redirected to "breahtmian"]]

brêman I. (±) _to honour, extol_. [brême] II. (oe) _to rage_, NG.

brembel (Æ), brember == brêmel

brême (oe, ý) I. adj. _famous, glorious, noble_, _PPs_; AO. ['_breme_']
II. adv.

brêmel (¯æ) m. _brier_, _'bramble,' blackberry bush_, _Æ, Lcd_; Mdf.
[brôm]

brêmelæppel m. _blackberry_, #Lcd#.

brêmelberie f. _blackberry_, #Lcd#.

brêmelbr¯ær ¶ m. _bramble-brier_.

brêmellêaf n. _bramble-leaf_, #Lcd#.

brêmelrind f. _bramble-bark_, #Lcd#.

brêmelðyrne f. _bramble-bush_, Æ.

brêmen = brême I.

brêmendlic _noted_, OEG.

brêmer == brêmel

brêmlas nap. of brêmel.

bremman _to rage, roar_. [_Ger._ brummen]

bremung f. _roaring_, WW 242^39.

brencð pres. 3 sg. of brengan.

brene = bryne

brêneð pres. 3 sg. of *brênan _to make or dye brown_? (GK; BT reads
breneð = berneð pres. 3 sg. of bernan) #Run# 15.

±brengan (AO, CP) = bringan

brengnes f. _oblation_: (+) _food, support_, MkL 12^44. [*bringnes]

brenting m. _ship_, B 2807. [brant]

breo- = bre-

brêo- = brê-

brêod (NG) = brêad

breodian _to cry out_, #Mod# 28.

breoht- = bearht-, beorht-

brêosa (îo) m. _gadfly_, _WW_. ['_breeze_']

brêost nmf. (usu. in pl.) _'breast,' bosom_, _B, Lk, Lcd_; AO, CP:
_stomach, womb_: _mind, thought, disposition_, _Gen_; CP: '_ubertas_,'
#CPs# 35^9.

brêostbân n. '_breast-bone_,' _WW_ 158.

brêostbeorg = brêostgebeorh

brêostbyden (e^2) f. _breast_, #Gl#.

brêostcearu ¶ f. _heart-care, anxiety_.

brêostcofa ¶ m. _heart, affections_.

brêostgebeorh m. _bulwark_, WW 466^14.

brêostgehygd ¶, -hýd ¶ fn. _thought_.

brêostgeðanc ¶ m. _mind, thought_.

brêostgew¯ædu ¶ np. _corslet_.

brêostgyrd f. _sceptre_? OEG 3303; 2^188.

brêosthord ¶ n. _thought, mind_.

brêostlîn n. _stomacher_, WW 407^8.

brêostloca ¶ m. _mind, soul_.

brêostnet ¶ n. _coat of mail_.

brêostnyrwet n. _tightness of chest_, #Lcd# 189b.

brêostrocc m. _chest-clothing_, WW 151^39.

brêostsefa ¶ m. _mind, heart_.

brêosttoga m. _chieftain_, #Sol# 184.

brêostðing n. _region of the heart_, #Lcd# 3·146^18.

brêostwærc m. _pain in the chest_, #Lcd#.

brêostweall m. _breastwork, rampart_, WW 490^13.

brêostweorðung ¶ f. _breast-ornament_.

brêostwylm (e^2) m. _breast-fountain, teat_: _emotion, sorrow_.

Breot- = Bryt-

brêotan^2 ¶ _to break in pieces, hew down, demolish, destroy, kill_.

Breotas = Brittas  [[redirected to "Brytas" (Bryt)]]

Breoten, Breoton = Briten  [[redirected to "Bryten"]]

brêoton = (1) bryten; (2) pret. pl. of brêatan.
  [[redirected to "brêotan"]]

brêoðan^2 _to decay, waste away_, #Lcd# 63a.

±brêowan^2 _to 'brew,'_ _AO_.

brêowlâc n. _brewing_, ÆL 17^103.

brêr (¯æ) f. _'brier,' bramble_, _Lcd, WW_.

brerd (ea, eo) m. _brim, margin, border, surface_, _Jn, WW_: _shore,
bank_, Æ. ['_brerd_']

brerdful _brim-full_, _ÆL_ 6^282. ['_brerdful_']

brêrhl¯æw m. _brier-hillock_, EC 450^9.

brêrðyrne f. _brier-bush_, KC 6·221^13.

brêsan = brýsan

bresen = bræsen

bresne (æ) ¶ _mighty, strong_.

brêt pres. 3 sg. of brêdan, bregdan.

bret- = brit-, bryt-

brêð = br¯æð

brêðer ds. of brôðor.

brêw (#KGl#) = br¯æw

bric- = bryc-

brîc- = brýc-

briceð pres. 3 sg. of brecan.

bricst pres. 2 sg. of brecan.

brid = bridd

brîd = brýd

bridd m. _young 'bird,' chicken_, _Lk_; Æ, CP, Mdf.

brîdel, brîdels (ý) m. _'bridle,' rein, curb, restraint_, _Run_; Æ, CP.

brîdelshring m. _bridle-ring_, #El# 1194.

brîdelðwangas mp. _reins_.

briden = breden

brîd-gift = brýdgift

brîdgifu = brýdgifu

±brîdlian _to 'bridle,' curb_, _Bo_; CP.

briengan = bringan

brig = brycg

brîg = brîw

brigd n. _change or play of colours_, #Pa# 26. [bregdan]

brigdils (#Gl#) = brîdels  [[under "brîdel"]]

brihtan = bierhtan

brihtlîce = beorhtlîce

brim ¶ nm. _surf, flood, wave, sea, ocean, water_, _B_: _sea-edge,
shore_. ['_brim_']

brimceald ¶ _ocean-cold_.

brimclif n. _cliff by the sea_, B 222.

brimfaroð n. _sea-shore_ (BT) #Da# 322 (or ? 2 words).

brimflôd m. _flood, sea_.

brimfugol m. _sea-bird, gull_, #Wa# 47.

brimgiest m. _sailor_, #Rd# 4^25.

brimhengest ¶ m. _(sea-horse), ship_.

brimhlæst ¶ f. _sea-produce, (fish)_.

brimlâd ¶ f. _flood-way, sea-way_.

brimlîðend m. _sailor_: _pirate_.

brimmann ¶ m. _sailor_: _pirate_.

brimrâd ¶ f. _(sea-road), sea_.

brimsa? _gadfly_? (v. NC 354).

brimstæð n. _sea-shore_, #An# 496.

brimstrêam ¶ m. _current, sea_: _rapid, river_.

brimðyssa ¶ m. _ship_.

brimwîsa m. _sea-king, captain_, B 2930.

brimwudu ¶ m. _(sea-wood), ship_.

brimwylf f. _(she-)wolf of the sea or lake_, B 1507.

brimwylm m. _ocean surge, sea-wave_, B 1494.

bring m. _offering_, #CPs# 50^20.

±bringan^3 (e, y) (and wv) _to 'bring,' lead, bring forth, carry,
adduce, produce, present, offer_, _B, Bo, JnL_; AO, CP.

-bringelle v. on-b.

brîosa = brêosa

brîst, brîtst, pres. 2 sg., brît pres. 3 sg. of bregdan.

Brit- = Bryt-

brit- = bryt-

brîw m. _pottage, porridge_, _ÆGr, Lcd_. ['_bree_'; _Ger._ brei]

±brîwan _to prepare food, cook_.

brîwðicce _as thick as pottage_, #Lcd# 190a.

broc I. n. _affliction, misery, care, toil, adversity_, _Bl, Bo_; Æ, AO,
CP: _disease, sickness_, Æ: _fragment_. ['_broke_'; brecan] II. n. _use,
benefit_. III. _a kind of locust_? _WW_. ['_brock_'] IV. = brocc

brôc I. f. (? only in pl. brêc, _q.v._). II. m. _'brook,' torrent_, _Bo,
WW_; Mdf.

brocc m. _badger_, _Lcd_. ['_brock_']

broccen _of badger's skin_, WW 152^1.

brocchol n. _badger's hole_, EC 239^12.

broccian _to tremble_, GD 156.

brôce = brýce

brocen pp. of (1) brecan, (2) brûcan.

±brocian _to crush, hurt, afflict, molest_, Æ, AO, CP: _blame_. [broc]

broclic _full of hardship_, W 248^1.

brôcminte f. _brookmint, horsemint_.

brôcsêoc = br¯æcsêoc

brocung f. _affliction, sickness_, ÆH 1·472^7.

brod _shoot, sprout_, LHy 6^3.

brôd f. '_brood_,' _Æ_: _foetus_: _breeding, hatching_.

broddetan = brogdettan

broddian = brôdian

brôden pp. of brêdan.

brôdenm¯æl ¶ n. _damascened sword_.

brôder = brôðor

brôdet- = brogdet-

brôdian _to glitter, shine_, OEG.

brôdig adj. _broody_, A 8·309.

brôga m. _terror, dread, danger_, CP: _prodigy_.

brogden pp. of bregdan. ['_browden_']

brogdenm¯æl = brôdenm¯æl

brogdettan _to shake, brandish_: _tremble, quake_.

brogdettung f. _trembling, shaking_: _figment, pretence_.

±brogn _bough, bush, branch_, NG (v. ES 38·340 and JAW).

broht '_viscellum_,' WW 54^1.

brôht pp., brôhton pret. pl. of bringan.

brôhðrêa m. _dire calamity_, #Gen# 1813. [brôga]

brôm m. _'broom,' brushwood_, _Lcd_; Mdf.

brômfæsten n. _enclosure of broom_, WW 414^7.

brômig _broomy_, #Bl# 207^27?

bron- = bran-

brond == brand, brant

brord m. _prick, point_: _blade (e.g., of grass or corn)_.

±brosnian _to crumble, decay, fall to pieces, rot, wither, be
corrupted_, AO, CP.

brosniendlic (Æ), +brosnodlic (#Bl#, W) _corruptible, perishable,
transitory_.

±brosnung f. _decay, corruption, ruin_, Æ.

+brot n. _fragment_, G. [breotan]  [[headword spelled "brêotan"]]

Broten = Bryten

broten pp. of brêotan.

brotettan _to burst forth, shoot, sprout_? (Napier) = brogdettan? (BT),
v. OEG 1218n.

broð n. '_broth_,' _Lcd_. [brêowan]

brôðar, brôðer == brôðor

broðhund (WW 329^38; 548^19) = roðhund?

brôðor m. ds. brêðer '_brother_,' _Chr, Mt, Lk_. nap. (±) brôðor,
brôðru, _Gen, Jn_: _fellow-man_, _Ps_: _co-religionist_, _Mt_: _monk_.

brôðorbana m. _fratricide (person)_, #Gen# 1526.

brôðorcwealm m. _fratricide (act)_, #Gen# 1030.

brôðordohter f. _niece_, WW 173^30.

brôðorgyld n. _vengeance for brothers_? #Ex# 199.

brôðorlêas _brotherless_, #Rd# 85^16.

brôðorlic '_brotherly_,' _ÆGr_.

brôðorlîcnes f. _brotherliness_, BH.

brôðorlufu (-er) _love_, DR.

brôðorr¯æden f. _fellowship, brotherhood_, Æ: _membership of a
brotherhood_.

brôðorscipe m. _brotherliness, love_, _MtL_: (+) _brotherhood,
fraternity_, AO. ['_brothership_']

brôðorsibb f. _kinship of brothers_: _brotherly love_.

brôðorslaga m. _brother-slayer_.

brôðorslege m. _fratricide (act)_, CP.

brôðorsunu m. _brother's son, nephew_.

brôðorsybb = brôðorsibb

broðor-ðînen, -ðînenu f. _midwife_, Æ. [beorðor]

brôðorwîf n. _brother's wife, sister-in-law_.

brôðorwyrt (e^2) f. _'pulegium,' penny-royal_, WW 300^24.

+brôð-ru, -ra mp. _brothers, brethren_, _Mt_. ['_i-brotheren_']

brôður = brôðor

+browen pp. of brêowan.

brû f. nap. brû(w)a, gp. brûna _'brow,' eye-brow, eye-lid, eye-lash_,
_Rd, WW_.

±brûcan^2 _to 'brook,' use, enjoy, possess, partake of, spend_, _B_.
brocen cyrtel _a coat which has been worn_, Æ: _eat_, _JnL_; Æ: _execute
an office_: _cohabit with_. [_Ger._ brauchen]

brûcendlîce _serviceably_, OEG 53^1.

brûcung f. _function, occupation_, BC 1·154^13.

brûdon, brugdon pret. pl. of brêdan, bregdan.

brûn _'brown,' dark, dusky_, _Bo, Ex_: _having metallic lustre, shining_
(v. NED).

brûna gp. of brû.

brûn-basu, -be(o)su _brownish-purple_, OEG.

brûnecg ¶ _with gleaming blade_.

brûneða m. _itch, erysipelas_, #Lcd# 18a.

brûnewyrt = brûnwyrt

brûnfâg _burnished_? _brown-hued_? B 2615.

brungen pp., brungon pret. pl. of bringan.

brûnian _to become brown_, #Lcd# 106b.

brunna = burna  [[under "burn"]]

brûnwann _dusky_, #An# 1308.

brûnwyrt f. _'brownwort,' water-betony, wood-betony_, _Lcd_.

bruðon pret. pl. of brêoðan.

brûwa nap. of brû.

±bryce (i) I. m. _'breach' ('bruche'), fracture, breaking_, _Æ_ (i),
_Gu, LL_: _fragment_, OEG. [brecan] II. _fragile, brittle, worthless,
fleeting_. ['_bryche_'] III. m. _use, enjoyment, service, exercise,
advantage, gain, profit, fruit_, Æ (i), CP. [_Ger._ brauch]

brýce _useful, profitable_. [brûcan]

-brycel v. hûs-b.

bryceð pres. 3 sg. of brecan.

brycg f. '_bridge_,' _Æ_; AO, Mdf.

brycgbôt (i) f. _repairing of bridges_, LL.

brycggeweorc (i^1) n. _work of building or repairing bridges_.

brycgian _to 'bridge,' make a causeway, pave_, _An_.

brycgweard (i^1) m. _keeper or defender of a bridge_, #Ma# 85.

brycgwyrcende '_pontifex_'! DR 194^16.

±brýc-ian, -sian _to use, enjoy_, DR: _profit, benefit_.

brycð pres. 3 sg. of brecan.

brýcð pres. 3 sg. of brûcan.

brýd I. (ê, î) f. _'bride,' betrothed or newly-married woman, wife,
consort_, CP, Æ. brýdes w¯æde _wedding garment_: (¶) _(young) woman_. II.
= brygd

bryd- = bred-

brýd- = brîd-

brýdbedd n. _bridal bed_, Æ.

brýdbletsung (î) f. _marriage blessing_, LL 72, 38, 1.

brýdboda m. _paranymph, bridesman_, OEG 18b71.

brýdbûr n., brýdcofa m. _bride-chamber, bed-chamber_.

+bryddan _to frighten, terrify_, #Sol# 16.

-brýde v. un-b.

brýdeala, brýdealo(ð) n. _bride-ale, marriage-feast_, _Chr_.
['_bridal_']

brýdelic = brýdlic

brýdgifta fpl. _betrothal, espousals_.

brýdgifu f. _dowry_: (pl.) _espousals_, Æ.

brýdguma (Æ, CP), brýdiguma (Æ) m. '_bridegroom_,' _Jn_: _suitor_.

brýdhlôp n. _ceremony on conducting a bride to her new home, bridal,
wedding_, _Chr, MtL_. ['_bridelope_']

+brýdian _to marry_.

brýdlâc n. _bridal, wedded condition_, Æ; (pl.) _marriage ceremony_, Æ.
['_bridelock_']

brýdlêoð n. _epithalamium_, OEG.

brýdlic _bridal_. b. gewrit _Song of Solomon_, WW 388^30.

brýdloca m. _bride-chamber_, #Bl#.

brýdlôp = brýdhlôp

brýdlufe f. _love of a bride_, #Jul# 114.

brýdniht f. _wedding-night_, MH 14^28.

brýdræst f. _bridal bed_.

brýdrêaf n. _wedding garment_, MtL 22^11.

brýdsang m. _epithalamium_, WW.

brýdðing np. _nuptials_, _Bl_. ['_brydthing_']

brygc = brycg

brygd I. (bryd) m. _drawing out, unsheathing, brandishing_, LL. II. =
br¯æd III.

bryht == beorht

bryhtan = bierhtan

±bryidan _to seize property improperly held by another_, LL. [=
*brigdan? BT]

brym, brymm == brim

brým- = brêm-

bryne m. _burning, conflagration_, _BH_: _fire, flame, heat_, _MtL_; AO:
_inflammation, burn, scald_, _Lcd_: _torch_: _fervour, passion_.
['_brine_,' '_brune_'; beornan]

brýne f. '_brine_,' _WW_; Æ.

brynêadl f. _fever_, WW 238^26.

brynebrôga m. _fire-terror_, #Az# 161.

brynegield ¶ (i^3) m. _burnt-offering_.

brynehât _burning hot_, #Dom# 51.

brynelêoma m. _fire-gleam, flame_, B 2313.

brynenes f. _hard, fiery trial_, #HGl# 469.

brynetêar m. _hot tear_, #Cr# 152.

bryne-wylm, -welm ¶ m. _wave of fire, flame, burning heat_.

bryngan = bringan

brynig ¶ _fiery, burning_.

brynstân m. _brimstone_, NC 275.

bryrd = brerd

bryrdan _to urge on, incite, encourage_, #Met# 13^3. [brord]

bryrdnes f. _incitement, instigation_.

±brýs-an, -ian _to 'bruise,' crush, pound_, _BH, DD_: _season_, #Sc#
20^20.

+brýsednes f. _bruising, crushing_, WW 211^23.

brýsewyrt f. _daisy, soap-wort_, _Lcd_ 1·374. ['_bruisewort_']

brystmian = brytsnian

brýt pres. 3 sg. of brêotan.

Bryt m. _Briton_: _Breton_.

bryta = brytta

brytan = bryttian

±brýtan _to crush, pound_: (+) _break up, destroy_.

-brytednes v. for-b.

Bryten (e, eo, i, o) f. _Britain_.

bryten (eo) _spacious, roomy_, #Sat# 687.

brytencyning ¶ m. _powerful king_.

brytengrûnd m. _broad earth_, #Cr# 357.

Brytenlond n. _Britain_: _Wales_.

brytenrîce (eo) n. I. _spacious kingdom_, #Az# 107. II. _kingdom of
Britain_.

Brytenwealda m. _wielder of Britain, Bretwalda, chief king_.

brytenwongas mp. _spacious plains, the world_, #Cr# 380.

brýtest pres. 2 sg. of brêotan.

brytian = bryttian

Bryt-land, -lond = Brytenlond

brytm¯ælum _piecemeal_, OEG 1553n.

brytnere m. _steward_, CP 459^11.

±brytnian (i) _to divide, distribute, dispense, administer_, _B_.
['_britten_']

brytnung f. _distribution_, WW 222^43.

brýtofta pl. _espousals_, WW 171^5. [brýd, ðoft]

Bryton = Bryten, Briten  [[both under "Bryten"]]

±brytsen f. _fragment_, FM, G.

brytsnian _to parcel out, distribute_, OEG 2195: (+) _enjoy, possess_,
ES 8·473^33.

brýtst pres. 2 sg. of brêotan.

Brytt == Bryt

brytta ¶ (e) m. _dispenser, giver, author, governor, prince, lord_.
sinces b. _treasure-giver, lord_. [brêotan]

+bryttan = +brýtan

±bryttian (i) _to divide, dispense, distribute_, CP: _rule over,
possess, enjoy the use of_.

Bryttisc '_British_,' _Chr_.

Bryttwealas, Brytwalas mp. _Britons of Wales_.

Brytwylisc _British, Welsh_.

bryðen f. _brewing, drink_, _Gu, Lcd_. ['_burthen_'; broð]

brýwlâc (Æ) = brêowlâc

bû I. n. nap. bý _dwelling_. [_Ger._ bau] II. v. bâ, bêgen.

±bûan anv. (intr.) _to stay, dwell, live_, AO: (tr.) _inhabit, occupy_:
_cultivate_. [_Ger._ bauen]

bûc, bucc m. _belly, stomach_, _Æ_: _pitcher_, Æ: _beaver (of helmet)_?
['_bouk_'; _Ger._ bauch]

bucca m. _'buck,' he-goat, male deer_, _Æ, Lcd_; CP.

budda m. _beetle_, WW 543^10.

bûde 3 sg., bûdon pl. pret. of bûan.

budon pret. pl. of bêodan.

bûend m. _dweller, inhabitant_.

bufan (_Æ_; AO, CP) I. prep. (w. d.) _over, 'above'_: (w. a.) _on,
upon_. II. adv. _above, overhead, before_.

bufan-cweden, -nemd, -sprecen _above mentioned_, GD.

bufon = bufan

bûg- = bû-

±bûgan I. (sv^2) _to 'bow,' bow down, turn, bend, stoop, sink_, _Æ, AO,
Rood_: _submit, give way_, _Æ, B, Chr_: _depart, flee, retire_, Æ, AO:
_join, go over to_, Æ: _convert_, Æ. II. = bûan

bûh imperative of bûgan.

bûian = bûan

bul = bula I.

bula m. I. _ornament_. [_L._] II. _bull_? EC 449^22.

bulberende _wearing an ornament_, WW 195^37; OEG 8^318.

bulentse f. _a plant_, #Lcd# 44b.

bulgon pret. pl. of belgan.

bulluc m. _male calf, 'bullock,'_ _Sc_.

bulot, bulut _ragged robin, cuckoo-flower_, #Lcd#.

bûn = bûan

bund f? _bundle_, MtL 13^30.

bûnda = bônda

bunden pp., bundon pret. pl. of bindan.

bundenheord _with bounden tresses_, B 3151.

+bundennes f. _obligation_.

bundenstefna adj. _(ship) with an ornamented prow_, B 1911.

bune I. f. _cup, beaker, drinking vessel_. II. _reed, cane_? _WW_
198^12. ['_bun_']

bûnes f. _dwelling_, NC 292.

bûr n. _'bower,' apartment, chamber_, _Gen, WW_: _storehouse, cottage,
dwelling_, _KC_; Æ. [bûan]

±bûr (usu. +; but bûr at LL 92, 6, 3) m. _free-holder of the lowest
class, peasant, farmer_. ['_gebur_']

bûrbyrde (æ^2) _of peasant birth_, Ct.

bûrcniht n. _chamberlain, eunuch_.

bûrcot n. _bed-chamber_, CP.

burg (burh) f. (gds. and nap. byrig) _any important dwelling within a
walled enclosure, fort, castle_, _Chr, WW_; CP: _'borough,' walled
town_, _AO, Mt_; Æ. [v. Mdf]

burg- v. also burh-.

burgâgend m. _city-owner_, #El# 1175.

burgat = burggeat

burgbryce m. _breaking into a (fortified) dwelling_, LL: _penalty for
that offence_, LL.

burgen = byrgen

bûrgerihta np. _peasant's rights or dues_, LL 446 (4).

burgeteld ¶ n. _pavilion, tent_.

burgfæsten n. _fortress_, #Gen# 1680.

burgfolc n. _townspeople_, B 2220.

burggeat n. _castle-gate_.

burghege m. _fence of a 'burg,'_ Ct.

burg-hlið ¶ n. nap. -hleoðu _fortress-height_ (or ?= beorg-hlîð).

burglagu f. _civil law_, GPH 388.

burglêod, -lêoda m. _citizen_, AO.

burgloca ¶ m. _fortified inclosure, walled town_.

burglond n. _native city_, #Cr# 51.

burgon pret. pl. of beorgan.

burgræced n. _fortress_, #Ruin# 22.

burgrûn f. _sorceress_; pl. _fates, furies_, #Gl#.

burg-sæl ¶ n. nap. -salu _city-hall, house_.

burgs¯æta (ê^2) m. _denizen of a town, citizen_, WW.

burgscipe m. _borough_, WW 497^18.

burgsele m. _castle-hall, house_, #Rim# 30.

burgsittende ¶ mpl. _city-dwellers_.

burgsorg = borgsorg

burgsteall m. _citadel_? _city_? WW 205^36.

burgstede ¶ m. _city, castle_.

burgtûn m. _city_, _Wif_ 31. ['_borough-town_']

burgðelu f. _castle floor_, _Fin_ 30 (burh-). [v. '_theal_']

burg-waran, -waru fp., -ware (AO, CP), -waras, mp. _inhabitants of a_
'burg,' _burghers, citizens_.

burgweall m. _city-wall_, Æ.

burgweg m. _road, street_.

burgwîgend m. _warrior_, #El# 34.

burh == burg

burhbiscop m. _bishop of a city_.

burhbôt f. _liability for repair of the walls of a town or
fortress_, LL.

burhealdor m. _burgomaster, mayor_, Æ.

burhgeard m. _castle yard_, EC 328.

burhgeatsetl n. _jurisdiction over those belonging to the_ 'burg'? _seat
in a court at the city gate_? (BT; or ? two words, v. LL 456, 2).

burhgemet n. _measure used in a town_, LL 477 (6).

burhgemôt n. _town's meeting_, LL.

burhgerêfa m. _chief magistrate of a town, provost, mayor_, _WW_.
['_borough-reeve_']

burhgeðingð f. _town council_, LL 228, 1, 2.

burhmann m. _citizen_, WW. ['_borough-man_']

burhr¯ædden f. _citizenship_, WW 441^10.

burhrest f. _chamber-couch_, IM 125^86. [?= *bûrrest, ES 38·347]

burhriht n. _town right, law in a town_, LL 477 (6).

burh-rûn, -rûne f. _fury, sorceress_, WW 245^16.

±burhscipe m. _township, civil district_.

burhscîr f. _city limits, city, township_, Æ.

burhspr¯æc f. _courtly speech_, #Gl#.

burhstaðol m. _foundation of the wall of a_ 'burg,' #Lcd# 1·328^23.

burhðegn m. _living in a_ 'burg'; or ?= bûrðegn

burhwarumann m. _burgess_, BH 40^31.

burhwealda m. _burgess_, BH 40^31#b#.

burhweard ¶ m. _city defender_.

burhwela m. _treasure of a city_, B 3100.

burhwelle f. _spring that supplies a town_? BT.

burhwerod n. _townsfolk_.

burhwita m. _town councillor_.

bûrland n. _land occupied by peasants_, EC 384´.

burn f., burna (CP) m., burne f. _brook, small stream_, _Jn_; Mdf:
_spring or well water_, _CP, WW_. ['_burn_'; _Ger._ brunnen]

burnon pret. pl. of biernan.

burnsele m. _bath-house_, #Ruin# 22.

burnstôw f? _bathing-place_, KC.

bûrrêaf n. _tapestry_, TC 530^36.

bûrscipe = burhscipe

burston pret. pl. of berstan.

bûr-ðegn, -ðên m. _page, chamberlain_.

burðre = byrðere

buruh = burg

bûst pres. 2 sg. of bûan.

bût m. _a vessel_, LL 455´ (?= bûc; BT).

bûta = (1) bûtan, (2) bûtû

bûtan I. prep. w. d. and (rarely) a. _out of, outside of, off, round
about_: _except, without, all but, but only_; _besides, in addition to_:
_in spite of_. II. conj. (w. ind.) _except, except that, but, only_.
b. ðæt _except_: (w. subj.) _unless, save that_: (w. subst.) _except,
but, besides, if only, provided that_. III. adv. _without, outside_,
#Chr#. ['_bout_,' '_but_']

bûte = (1) bûtan, (2) bûtû

butere f. '_butter_,' _Lcd_; Æ. [_L._]

buter-flêoge, -flêge f. '_butterfly_,' _WW_.

butergeðweor n. _butter-curd, butter_.

+buterian _to butter_, #Lcd# 121a.

buter-ic, -uc = butruc

buterstoppa m. _butter-vessel_, WW 280^25.

bûton = bûtan

butre = butere

butruc m. _(leather) bottle_, Æ.

butsecarl m. _boatman, mariner_, _Chr_. ['_buscarl_']

buttorflêoge = buterflêoge

buttuc m. _end, small piece of land_.

bûtû (bûtwu, bûta, bûte) _both_ (neuter). v. also bêgen.

butueoh (#Chr#) v. betwux.

bûtun = bûtan

buturuc = butruc

bûtwû = bûtû

bûwan = bûan

bý = bû

býan (N) = bûan

byccen (i) _of a goat, goat's_, NC 275.

býcera m. = bêocere

±bycgan (i) _to 'buy,' pay for, acquire_, _Mt, Jn_: _redeem, ransom_:
_procure, get done_: _sell_, LL. [_Goth._ bugjan]

bycgend v. beccen.

býcn- = bêacn-, bîecn-

byd- = bed-, bid-

býd- = bîd-

  [[Printed on one line:
  byd-, býd- = bed-, bid-, bîd-]]

bydel m. _'beadle,' apparitor, warrant officer_, _Lk_; Æ: _herald,
forerunner_, Æ: _preacher_, Æ. [bêodan]

bydelæcer m. _land of a_ 'bydel,' KC 6·152^29.

byden f. _measure, bushel_: _bucket, barrel, vat, tub_. [_Low L._
butina; _Ger._ bütte]

bydenbotm m. _bottom of a vessel_, WW 123^4.

bydenfæt n. _bushel, barrel_.

býdla m. _worshipper_, NG.

býencg (DR) = býing

býend = bûend

-byffan v. â-b.

byfgendlic = bifigendlic

byfian (Æ) = bifian

byfor = beofor

byg- = big-

býg- = bî-, bê-, bîg-

  [[Printed on one line:
  byg-, býg- = big-, bî, bê-, bîg-]]

býgan = bîegan

byge (ý?; i) m. _curve, bend, corner, angle, cone (of a helmet)_, AO,
CP: _traffic, commerce_, LL 128, 5.

býgel = bêogol

bygen f. _purchase_, LL (328^11).

bygendlic _easily bent, flexible_, BH.

bygeð pres. 3 sg. of bycgan.

býgeð pres. 3 sg. of bûan.

byht m. I. (±) _bend, angle, corner_, _Ct_: _bay, 'bight.'_ [bûgan]
II. ¶ n? _dwelling_. [bûan]

býhð pres. 3 sg. of bûgan.

býing = bû I.

býl m? býle f? _'boil,' carbuncle_, _WW_.

bylcettan = bealcettan  [[under "bealcan"]]

±byld f. _constancy, confidence, boldness_. [beald]

bylda m. _builder_? _householder_? #Cra# 75. [bold]

byldan I. _to build, construct_, KC. II. = bieldan

byldu, byldo = bieldo

býle = býl

byledbrêost (= bylged- ?) _puff-breasted_, #Rd# 81^1.

bylewit = bilewit

bylg = belg

bylgan _to 'bellow,'_ _MH_.

bylgð pres. 3 sg. of belgan.

bylig = belg

býliht (îly-) _ulcerous_, #Lcd# 63b.

bylwet, byl(y)wit == bilewit

býme (Æ) = bîeme

býmere (_WW_), býmesangere m. _trumpeter_, Æ. ['_bemer_']

býmian _to blow the trumpet_, _Ps, WW_. ['_beme_']

bynd = bind

byndele, byndelle = bindele

býne _cultivated, inhabited, occupied_, AO. [bûan]

byrc = beorc

byrce = beorce

byrcholt n. _birch wood_, WW.

byrcð pres. 3 sg. of beorcan.

byrd I. (i) f. _birth_ (pl. w. sg. meaning). II. f. _burden_, GD 215^1.

+byrd I. fn.; +byrdo, -u f. _birth_, _Cr_: _descent, parentage, race_,
_BH_: _nature, quality, rank_, Æ, AO: (¶) _fate_. ['_birde_'; beran] II.
_burdened_, MtR 11^28. III. = +byrded

+byrdan _to beard, fringe, embroider_.

-byrdan v. +ed-b.

+byrdboda m. _herald of a birth_.

+byrddæg m. _birthday_, Mt 14^6.

byrde _of high rank, well-born, noble, rich_, AO.

+byrde I. _innate, natural_. II. = +byrd I.

+byrdelîce _energetically, zealously_, CP 160^19.

byrden = byrðen

byrdicge f. _embroideress_, WW 262^18.

byrdinenu = byrððinenu  [[headword spelled "byrððînenu"]]

byrding f. _embroidering_, WW 294^10.

-byrding v. hyse-b.  [[under "hyseberðling"]]

byrdistre _embroiderer_ (v. ANS 123·418).

+byrdlic (AS 5^13) = +byredlic

byrdling _tortoise_, OEG 23^21.

-byrdling v. in-, frum-b.

byrdscype m. _child-bearing_, #Cr# 182.

+byrd-tîd f., -tîma m. _time of birth_.

+byrdu = +byrd I.

+byrdwiglere m. _birth-diviner, astrologer_.

+byrdwîtega m. _astrologer_.

byre I. ¶ m. (nap. byras, byre) _child, son, descendant_: _young man,
youth_. [beran] II. m. _mound_. III. (±) m. _time, opportunity_, Æ:
_occurrence_, AS 62^13. IV. m. _strong wind, storm_, GPH 400.

býre n. _stall, shed, hut_, _Gl_. ['_byre_']

+byredlic _suitable, fitting, convenient, congenial_, DR. adv. -lîce.

byrele mf. _cup-bearer, butler, steward_, _B_. ['_birle_']

byrelian _to give to drink, serve with drink_, _Gu_. ['_birle_' vb.]

+byrelic = +byredlic

byren I. (and byrene) f. _she-bear_, _Æ_. [bera] II. = beren

-býren v. nêahge-b.

byres f. _borer, graving tool, awl, chisel_, #Gl#. [borian]

byreð I. = bierð pres. 3 sg. of beran. II. = pres. 3 sg. of byrian I.

byrg gds. and nap. of burg.

byrg- v. also byrig-.

+byrg I. (i) n. _taste_, DR 116^3. II. bêon on gebyrge (w. d.) _to help,
protect_. [beorgan]

byrga m. _security, surety, bail, one who gives bail_, #Gl#. [_Ger._
bürge]

±byrgan I. (i) _to raise a mound, hide_, _'bury,' inter_, ¶_Hy_; AO.
II. ¶ (e, eo) _to taste, eat_. III. = beorgan

byrgels (e, i) m. _tomb_, _Æ, Ct_. ['_buriels_']

byrgelslêoð (e^1) n. _epitaph_, #HGl# 427.

byrgelssang m. _dirge_: _epitaph_.

byrgen (i, u) f. _burying-place, grave, sepulchre_, _El_; Æ, AO, CP:
_burial_. ['_burian_'; beorgan]

+byrgen f. _caul_? #Lcd# 185a.

byrgend m. _grave-digger_, #PPs# 78^3.

byrgenlêoð n. _epitaph_, BH 94^12.

byrgensang m. _dirge_, OEG.

byrgenstôw f. _burying-place_.

byrgere m. _corpse-bearer_, _WW_. ['_burier_']

byrgian = byrgan

byrging I. f. _burial_. II. f. _taste_.

byrglêoð n. _dirge, epitaph_, #Gl#.

byrht = beorht

byrht- = beorht-, bierht-

byrhtm = breahtm

±byrian I. (impers.) _to happen, pertain to, belong to, befit_, _Æ, Mk,
MtR_; AO, CP. ['_bir_'; '_i-bure_'] II. = byrgan I. and II.

byric = beorc

byrig = burg, and gds. of burg.

byrig- = byrg-, burh-

byrigberge f. _mulberry_, #Lcd# 86a.

+byrigednes f. _burial_.

byrignes I. f. _burial_, _BH_. ['_buriness_'] II. f. _tasting, taste_.

-býrild v. nêah-geb.

byris = byres

byrisang (i) m. _dirge_, #HGl# 488^57.

byrl- = byrel-

byrla m. _trunk (of body)_, #Lcd# 58b.

+byrman _to ferment, leaven_: _swell up, be proud_. [beorma]

+byrmed n. _leavened bread_.

byrnan (Æ) = biernan

byrne I. f. _corslet_, _WW_; CP. ['_burne_'] II. = burne, burn. III. =
bryne  [[II. under "burn"]]

byrnete f. _barnacle_, NC 275.

byrn-ham, -hama ¶ m. _corslet_.

+byrnod _corsleted_, _ÆGr_ 256^16. ['_i-burned_']

byrnsweord n. _flaming sword_, #Bl# 109^34.

byrnwiga m. _corsleted warrior_.

byrn-wîgend, -wiggend ¶ m. _corsleted warrior_.

byrs, byrse = byres

byrst I. (e) m. _loss, calamity, injury, damage, defect_, Æ. [berstan]
II. n. _(land-)slip_, KC 3·52^9 (v. also KC 5·112^19 and Mdf). III. f.
'_bristle_,' _Ep, Lcd_; Æ. ['_brise_,' '_brust_'] IV. pres. 3 sg. of
berstan. V. pres. 2 sg. of beran.

+byrsted _furnished with bristles_, OEG 23^3.

byrstful _disastrous_, #Chr# 1116.

byrstig _broken, rugged_: _afflicted_. [berstan]

+byrtîd = +byrdtîd

byrð I. pres. 3 sg. of beran. II. = beorð

byrðen f. _'burden,' load, weight_, _Bl, WW_; Æ, CP: _charge, duty_.
[beran]

byrðenm¯ælum _a heap at a time_, ÆH 1·526^22.

byrðenm¯æte (ê^3) _burdensome_, #KGl# 1011

byrðenstan m. _millstone_.

byrðenstrang _strong at carrying burdens_, ÆH 1·208^13.

byrðere I. m. _bearer, supporter_, Æ. [beran] II. f. _child-bearer,
mother_.

byrðestre (e) f. _female carrier_, #HGl# 498^18.

byrðling (e) m. _carrier_, OEG 4922.

byrðor = beorðor

+byrðtid = +byrdtîd

byrððînenu f. _midwife_, GPH 392.

bysceop == bisceop

bysegu = bysgu  [[redirected to "bisgu"]]

bysen == bisen

bysig-, bysg- = bisg-

bysmer = bismer

bysmer- = bismr-

bysmerglêow n. _shameful lust_, Æ 23b^451.

bysmor = bismer

bysmr- = bismr-

bysn == bysen

byst = bist pres. 2 sg. of bêon.

býsting f. _beestings_, WW 129^2. [bêost]

byt I. = bit pres. 3 sg. of biddan. II. = bytt

být pres. 3 sg. of (1) bêodan, (2) bêatan.

býtel, býtl = bîetl

byter = biter

bytla ¶ = bylda

bytlan, ±bytlian _to build, erect_, Æ, CP. [botl]

+bytle n. _building, dwelling_, Æ.

±bytlung f. _building_, Æ.

bytme f? _keel_: _head of a dale_.

bytming f. _hulk, keel of ship_, Æ.

bytne = bytme

býtst pres. 2 sg. of bêatan and bêodan.

bytt I. f. _bottle, flagon_, _Mt, WW_; Æ: cask ['_bit_'] II. _small
piece of land_, KC 3·85^11. III. pres. 3 sg. of biddan.

bytte = bytt I.

byttehlid n. _butt-lid_, WW 213^23.

byttfylling f. _filling of casks_, LL 178, 8, 1.

byð = bið pres. 3 sg. of bêon.

býð pres. 3 sg. of bûan.

byðme = bytme

býwan (êo, î) _to rub, brighten, furbish up, adorn_.

byxen _made of boxwood_, WW. [box]




=C=


cæb- = cæf-

c¯æc- = cêac-

cæderbêam = cederbêam

cæf == ceaf

cæfertûn = cafortûn

cæfester (cæb-) n. _halter_, #Gl#. [_L._ capistrum]

-cæfian v. be-, ofer-, ymb-c.
  [["oferccæfian" only in participle "ofercæfed"]]

cæfing f. _hair-ornament_, #Gl#.

cæfl m. _halter, muzzle_, WW.

c¯æg f., c¯æga m. '_key_' (lit. and fig.), _Ex, LL, Rd_: _solution,
explanation_, _CP_.

c¯ægbora m. _key-bearer, jailor_.

c¯æghiorde m. _keeper of the keys, steward_, WW.

c¯ægloca m. _locked depository_, LL 362, 76, 1.

-c¯æglod v. â-c.

cæh- = ceah-

cæl- = cel-, ceal-, ciel-

cælð pres. 3 sg. of calan.

cæm- = cem-

cæn- = cen-, cyn-

c¯æpehûs = cîepehûs

cæppe f. '_cap_,' _WW_: _cope, hood_. [_Lat._ cappa]

cæpse f. _box_, NC 276. [_L._ capsa]

cær- = car-, cear-, cer-, cier-

cærse (e) f. _'cress,' water-cress_, _Lcd_; Mdf.

cærsiht _full of cress_, KC 3·121^18.

cærte = carte

c¯æs = cêas pret. 3 sg. of cêosan.

c¯æse = cîse

cæstel = castel

cæster (NG) == ceaster

câf _quick, active, prompt_, Æ: _bold, brave_. adv. câfe.

câflic _bold_. adv. -lîce _promptly_: _boldly_, Æ.

caflwyrt = cawlwyrt

câfnes f. _energy_, ÆH 2·282^4.

  [[See separate entries for "cawl II." and "wyrt".]]

cafortûn (æ, ea^1, e^2) m. _vestibule, court, court-yard_, Æ: _hall,
residence_, Æ.

câfscipe m. _alacrity, boldness_.

+cafstrian _to bridle, curb_, CP. [cæfester]

cahhetan = ceahhetan

câl = cawl

câl- = cawel-

  [[Printed on one line:
  câl == cawl, cawel]]

calan^6 _to grow cool or cold_.

calc I. m. _shoe, sandal_. [_L._ calceus] II. = cealc

calcatrippe = coltetræppe

calcrond _shod (of horses)_, #GnE# 143.

cald (A) == ceald

câlend m. _the beginning of a month_, AO: _month_, _Men_: (¶) _span of
life_. ['_calends_']

câlendcwide m. _tale of days_, #Sol# 479.

calf == cealf

calfur (#VPs#) nap. of cealf.

calic m. '_chalice_,' _Lcd, Lk, Mt, VPs_. [_L._ calicem]

-calla (ZDA 10·345) v. hilde-c.

calu (cal(e)w- in obl. cases) _'callow,' bare, bald_, _Rd_. [_Ger._
kahl]

calwer = cealer

calwer-clîm, -clympe _curds_? WW.

câma m. _muzzle, collar, bit_, #PPs# 31^11.

camb (o) m. _'comb,' crest_, _Ep, WW_: _honey-comb_, #LPs#.

cambiht _combed, crested_, WW.

cambol = cumbol

camel m. '_camel_,' _Mt, Mk_.

cammoc (u^2) nm? _'cammock,' rest-harrow_, _Lcd, WW_.

±camp (o) I. m. _combat, battle, struggle, warfare_, _B, Rd_. ['_camp_']
II. _field, plain_? EC 183^2. [_L._ campus]

campdôm m. _military service, warfare_, Æ.

campealdor m. _commander_, OEG 4433.

campgefêra m. _fellow-soldier_, #Gl#.

camphâd m. _warfare_, BH.

±campian (o) _to strive, fight_, _Gu_; Æ. ['_camp_']

camplic _military_, Æ.

campr¯æden f. _war, warfare_, #An# 4.

campstede ¶ m. _battle-field_.

campung f. _fighting, warfare_.

campw¯æpen (o^1) n. _weapon_, #Rd# 21^9.

campweorod (e^2, ea^2, e^3) n. _army, host_.

campwîg ¶ (comp-) n. _battle, combat_.

campwîsa m. _director of public games_, #HGl# 405.

campwudu m. _shield_? #El# 51.

can pres. 1 and 3 sg. of cunnan.

cân m. _germ, sprout_? #PPs# 79^10. [_OS._ cînan]

±canc n. _jeering, scorn, derision_, #Gl#.

canceler m. _chancellor_, #Chr# 1093. [_Low L._ canceliarium]

cancer m. _cancer_, Æ. [_L._]

cancerâdl f. _cancer_, #Lcd# 41a.

cancerwund f. _cancerous wound_.

canc-etan, -ettan _to cry out, mock, deride_.

cancetung f. _boisterous laughter_, WW 382^36.

cancor = cancer

candel fn. _lamp, lantern, 'candle,'_ _WW_; Æ. [_L._ candela]

candelbora m. _acolyte_.

candelbryd (?= bred; BT) _flat candlestick_, IM 120.

candellêoht n. '_candle-light_,' _RB_.

candelmæsse f. _'candlemas,' the feast of the Purification_, _Chr_.

candelmæsseæfen n. _Candlemas eve_.

candelmæssedæg m. _Candlemas day_, NC 276.

candelsnýtels m. _candle-snuffers_, WW 126^28.

candelstæf m. _candlestick_, _Mt_. ['_candlestaff_']

candelsticca m. '_candlestick_,' _EC_ 250´.

candeltrêow n. _candelabrum_, MtR 5^15.

candeltwist m. _pair of snuffers_, #Gl#.

candelweoce f. _'candle-wick,' torch_, _WW_.

candelwyrt f. _candlewort_, WW 137^9.

candol = candel

cann I. f. _cognizance, averment, asseveration, clearance_, LL. II. (±)
pres. 3 sg. of cunnan.

canne f. _'can,' cup_, _WW_.

canon m. _canon, rule_. canones bêc _canonical books_. [_L._ canon]

canonic I. m. _canon_. II. _canonical_, Æ.

canoniclic _canonical_.

cans = canst pres. 2 sg. of cunnan.

cantel m? n? _buttress, support_, A 8·324^10.

cantelcâp m. _cope_, #Chr# 1070#e#.

cantercæppe f. _cope (vestment)_.

cantere m. _singer_, CM 904.

canterstæf m. _chanter's staff_, EC 250.

cantic (Æ), canticsang m. _canticle, song_. [_L._]

-câp v. cantel-c.

capellan m. _chaplain_, EC, #Chr# (late). [_L._]

capian _to look_. ûp c. _to look up, lie on its back (of the moon)_,
#Lcd# 3·266^23. capiende '_supinus_,' GPH 393a.

capitel = capitol

capitelhûs n. _chapter-house_, IM 122^4.

capit-ol, -ul, -ula m. _chapter (cathedral or monastic)_: _chapter
(division of a book)_, _lesson_, _LL_: _anthem_. [v. '_chapitle_']

capitolmæsse f. _early mass, first mass_.

+capitulod _divided into chapters_, LL (204^2).

cappa = cæppe

capun m. '_capon_,' _WW_. [_L._ capônem]

carbunculus m. _carbuncle_, CP. [_L._]

carc-ern (AO, CP), -ærn n. _prison, jail_. [_L._ carcer]

carcernðystru f. _prison darkness_, LL.

carcernweard m. _jailor_, MH 24^15,19.

cârclife = gârclife

care- = car-

carful (ea) _anxious, sad_, _Gu, Soul_: _'careful,' attentive,
painstaking_, _Ps, WW_: _troublesome_. adv. -lîce, _LL_.

carfulnes f. _care, anxiety_: '_carefulness_,' _Lcd_.

cargealdor n. _sorrowful song_, #Jul# 618.

cargêst m. _sad spirit, devil_, #Gu# 365.

carian _to care for, be anxious_.

caricum dp. of sb. _with dried figs_, ÆL 23b^661. [_L._ carica]

carig (ea, e) ¶ _sorrowful, anxious_, _Cr, Soul_: _grievous_, DD.
['_chary_']

carl m. _man_. [_ON._ karl]

carlêas _'careless,' free from care_, _RB_.

carlêasnes, carlêast f. _freedom from care, security_, _WW_.
['_carelessness_']

carlfugol (ea^1, e^3) m. _male bird, cock_.

carlîce (ea) _wretchedly_.

carlmann m. _male, man_, #Chr#.

carr m. _stone, rock_, NG. [_Celtic_]

carseld (ea) n. _home of care_, #Seaf# 5.

carsîð (ea) _painful journey_, B 2396.

carsorg f. _sad anxiety_, #Gen# 1114.

carte (æ) f. _paper for writing on_, Æ: _document, deed_. [_L._ charta]

caru (ea) f. _'care,' concern, anxiety, sorrow_, _B, Lk_; AO.

carwylm (æ^2, e^2) ¶ m. _welling sorrow_.

casebill n. _club_, GPH 394 (v. A 31·66).

câserdom m. _imperial sway_.

Câsere (Câser, _JnL_) m. _Cæsar, emperor_, _Bo_; Æ, AO. ['_Kaser_']

câsering f. _coin with Cæsar's head on it, drachma, didrachma_, NG.

câserlic _imperial_, WW 427^40.

câsern f. _empress_, AO 266^14.

cassuc m. _hassock, sedge_, #Lcd#.

cassuclêaf np. _hassock or sedge leaves_, #Lcd# 170a.

castel I. m. _'castle,' fort_, _Chr_. II. n. _town, village_, _Mt,
Mk, Lk_.

castelmann m. _townsman_, #Chr#.

castelweall m. _city wall, rampart_.

castelweorc n. _castle-building_, #Chr# 1137.

castenere m. _cabinet, chest_, TC 531^7.

casul m. _over-garment_, _'birrus,' cloak_, _WW_. ['_chasuble_']

câsus m. _(grammatical) case_, #ÆGr#.

catt m., catte f. '_cat_,' #Gl#; Mdf.

caul [S 6#n#1] = cawl I. and II.

cawellêaf n. _cabbage-leaf_, #Lcd#.

cawels¯æd n. _cabbage-seed_, #Lcd#.

cawelstela m. _cabbage-stalk_, #Lcd#.

cawelstoc (câl-) m. _cabbage-stalk_, #Lcd# 1·378^8.

cawelwurm m. _caterpillar_, WW 121^29.

cawl I. (e, ea, eo) m. _basket_, _AO_. ['_cawl_'] II. m. _'cole'
('caul,' 'cawel'), kale, cabbage_, _Lcd_.

cêac sm. _basin, pitcher, jug_, Æ, CP: _kettle, cauldron_, LL 24; 104;
116.

cêacâdl (êo) f. _jaw-ache_, #Lcd# 109a, 113a.

cêacbân n. _'cheek-bone,' jaw_, _WW_.

cêacbora m. _yoke for buckets_, #Gl#.

ceace f. _cake_? (BT) WW 505^10?

cêace (ê, ei, êo) f. _'cheek,' jaw, jawbone_, _Lcd, WW_.

ceacga m. _broom, furze_, BC, KC.

ceacl = ceafl

ceaf (e) n. nap. ceafu '_chaff_,' _Mt, Lk, WW_; Æ, CP.

ceaf- = caf-, ceaf-, cief-

ceaffinc m. _chaffinch_, ANS 76·206.

ceafl m. _jaw, cheek, jaw-bone, cheek-bone_, _Æ, Whale_. ['_jowl_']

ceaflâdl (cealf-) f. _disease of the jaws_, #Lcd# 90b.

ceafor (e) m. _cock-_'chafer,' _beetle_, _Ps, WW_; Æ.

ceahhe f. _daw_, KC 3·48^26.

ceahhetan _to laugh loudly_.

ceahhetung f. _laughter, jesting_, Æ.

cealc (a) m. _'chalk,' lime, plaster_, _AO_; Mdf: _chalkstone, pebble_,
_Ep, WW_.

+cealcian (æ) _to whiten_, MtL 23^27.

cealcstân m. _limestone, chalk_.

ceald I. adj. _'cold' ('cheald'), cool_, _Mt, Jn_; AO, CP. adv. cealde.
II. n. _coldness, cold_.

cealdheort _cruel_, #An# 138 (cald-).

cealdian _to become cold_, _Rim_. ['_cold_']

cealdnes f. _coldness, cold_, Æ.

cealer m. _pressed curds, jelly of curds or whey_. [_L._ galmaria]

cealerbrîw m. _pottage of curds_, #Lcd#.

cealf I. (æ, e) nm. (nap. cealfru) '_calf_,' _Æ_. II. = ceafl

+cealf (e) _great with calf_.

cealfâdl = ceaflâdl

cealfian _to calve_, Æ.

cealfloca m. _calf-pen_.

cealfre = cealre, cealer

cealfwyrt (a) '_eruca_,' WW 136^17.

ceallian _to 'call,' shout_, _Ma_ 91. [_ON._ kalla]

cealre = cealer and das. of cealer.

cealwa = calwa  [[form of "calu"]]

cêap (ê, ý) m. _cattle_, CP: _purchase, sale, traffic, bargain, gain_,
_B_; CP: _price_, _LL_. dêop c. _high price_. bûtan cêape _gratis_:
_goods, possessions, property_, _Chr_; AO: _market_, _Æ_. ['_cheap_']

cêapcniht m. _bought servant, slave_, #Gl#.

cêapdæg m. _market-day_, WW.

cêapêadig? _rich, wealthy_, #Gn# 108.

cêapealeðel n. _alehouse_ (v. BT).

cêapgyld n. _purchase money, market price_: _compensation_, v. LL 2·338.

cêapian _to bargain, trade_, _Mt_: _buy_, _Jn, Cr_; AO: _endeavour to
bribe_, #Da# 739. ['_cheap_'; _Ger._ kaufen]

cêapman m. _'chapman,' trader_, _BH, LL_.

cêapsceamul m. _seat of custom or toll, treasury_, G.

cêapscip n. _trading vessel_, AO 116^4.

cêapsetl (e^1) n. _toll-booth_, G.

cêapstôw f. _market-place, market_, CP.

cêapstr¯æt (ê, ý) f. _market-place_.

cêapung f. _traffic, trade_, _LL_. ['_cheaping_']

cêapunggemôt n. _market_, WW 450^1.

cear == car

cearcetung f. _gnashing, grinding_, W 200^18.

cearcian _to creak, gnash_, _Æ_. ['_chark_']

cearde = cierde pret. 3 sg. of cierran.

+cearfan _to cut off, kill_, NG.

cearm = cirm

cear-rige, -ruce _a vehicle_? #Gl#.

ceart _wild common land_, KC.

cearwund _badly wounded_? LL 6[63].

cêas I. = cêast. II. pret. 3 sg. of cêosan.

-cêasega v. wæl-c.

cêaslunger _contentious_, v. NC 276.

cêast (¯æ, ê) f. _strife, quarrelling, contention_, _WW_: _reproof_.

ceastel = castel

ceaster (æ, e) f. _castle, fort, town_, CP: ¶_heaven, hell_.

ceasteræsc m. _black hellebore_, #Lcd#.

ceasterbûend m. _citizen_, B 768.

ceastergewar- = ceasterwar-

ceasterherpað _high road_? (BT), KC 5·217^1.

ceasterhlid n. _city gate_, _Cr_ 314.

ceasterhof n. _house in a city_, #An# 1239.

ceaster-lêod f. np. -lêode _citizens_, NC 276.

ceasternisc (æ) _urban, municipal_, TC 244^13.

ceaster-s¯ætan, -s¯æte mp. _citizens_, TC.

±ceaster-waran mp., -ware, -waru f. _burghers, citizens_.

ceasterweall (e^1) m. _city wall_.

ceasterwîc f. _village_, #Bl# 69^35.

ceasterwyrt f. _black hellebore_, #Lcd#.

cêastful _contentious_.

cêaw pret. 3 sg. of cêowan.

ceawl (_MtL_) = cawl I.

cêce (_VPs_) = cêace

cêcel (coecil) _cake_, #Gl#.

cêde (#VPs#) = cîegde pret. 3 sg. of cîegan.

cedelc f. _the herb mercury_.

ceder nmf. _cedar_. [_L._ cedrus]

ceder-bêam mn., -trêow (ý) n. _cedar-tree_.

cedor- = ceder-

cêdrisc _of cedar_, DR.

cef (Æ) = ceaf

cef- = cæf-, ceaf-, cif-

cêgan (VHy), cêgian = cîegan

cehhettung = ceahhetung

ceîce (MtLR) = cêace

ceig- (N) = cîg-

ceir _cry, clamour_, DR.

cel = cawl

cêlan (¯æ) _to cool, become cold, be cold_, _MH, VPs_ (oe): (+) _quench
(thirst)_, _refresh_. ['_keel_']

celc I. (M) m. _chalice, cup_. [= calic] II. = cealc

celde ¶ f. _copious spring_? [cp. _Ger._ quelle]

celdre = ceoldre

cele = (1) ceole; (2) ciele

celen-dre f., -der n. _'coliander,' coriander_, _Lcd_.

cele-ðonie, -ðenie, cileðonie f. _celandine, swallow-wort_, #Lcd#.

celf (A) = cealf

celic = calic

cêling f. _cooling_, Æ: _cool place_, Æ.

celis _'peditis,' foot-covering_, A 37·45.

celiwearte = cielewearte

cell m. _(monastic) cell_, #Chr# 1129.

cellender n., cellendre f. = celendre

cellod (ê?) ¶ part. _round_? _hollow_? _embossed_? _beaked_? #Fin# 29;
#Ma# 283.

celmertmonn m. _hireling_, NG (v. ES 42·172).

±cêlnes f. _coolness, cool air, breeze_, CP. [côl]

celod v. cellod.

celras = ceallras, nap. of cealer.

±cemban (æ) _to comb_, _Æ_. ['_kemb_']

cemes f. _shirt_. [_L._ camisia]

cempa (æ) m. _warrior, champion_, _Gl, Ma_; Æ, AO, CP. [camp] ['_kemp_']

cempestre f. _female warrior_, OEG.

cên ¶ m. _pine-torch, pine_: _name of the rune for =c=_. [_Ger._ kien]

cendlic = cynlic

cêne _bold, brave, fierce_, _CP, Lcd, Ma_; Æ, AO: _powerful_, _VPs_:
_learned, clever_, _Met_ 10^51. ['_keen_'; _Ger._ kühn] also adv.

cenep m. _moustache_: _bit (of a bridle)_. [_ON._ kanpr]

cenlic = cynlic

cênlîce _boldly_, Æ. ['_keenly_']

±cennan _to conceive, bring forth_: _beget, create, produce_, _Mt, VPs_;
CP: _nominate, choose out_, Æ: _assign, attribute, give_: _declare, show
oneself, clear oneself, make a declaration in court_ (v. LL 2·32; 279
'cennan,' 'Anefang'), _B, LL, Ps_. ['_ken_']

cennend m. _parent_, #Bl#.

cennendlic _genital_.

cennes f. _produce, what is produced_, EHy 6^22: _childbirth_:
_birthday_.

cennestre f. _mother_, Æ.

cenning f. _procreation_, CP: _parturition, birth_, Æ: _declaration in
court_ (v. cennan).

cenningstân (y^1) m. _testing-stone_.

cenningstow f. _birthplace_, Æ.

cenningtîd f. _time of bringing forth_, Æ.

cennystre = cennestre

Cent, Centescîr f. _Kent_. [_L._ Cantia]

centaur m. _centaur_.

centaurie f. _centaury_ (plant).

Centingas mp. _inhabitants of Kent, Kentish men_. #Chr#.

Centisc _Kentish_.

Cent-land, -lond (AO) n. _Kent_.

Centrîce n. _kingdom of Kent_.

Centware mp. _inhabitants of Kent_, #Chr#.

cênðu f. _boldness_, B 2696.

cêo f. _chough, jay, jackdaw_, Æ.

cêoce (_WW_) = cêace

-cêocian v. â-c.

ceod? ceode? _bag, pouch_, CP, LL.

ceodor- = ceder-

ceofl, ceol (NG) = cawl I.

cêol m. _ship_.

ceolas mp. _cold winds, cold_, #Az# 103. [ciele?]

ceolbor- = cilfor-

ceoldre = cealre

ceole (e) f. _throat_: _gorge, chasm_: _beak of ship_, #Gl#. [_Ger._
kehle]

ceolor m. _throat_.

cêol-ðel n., -ðelu? f. _deck of a ship_, #Hu# 8.

ceolwærc m. _pain in the throat_, #Lcd# 113a.

ceorcing f. _complaining_, GPH 398.

±ceorfan^3 _to cut, cut down, slay_, _Mk, Æ_; LkL: _carve, cut out,
engrave_: _tear_.

ceorfæx f. _axe_, AO 160^15.

ceorfingîsen n. _branding iron_, #Sc#.

ceorfsæx n. _surgeon's knife, scalpel_, Æ.

±ceorian _to murmur, complain_, Æ, AO.

ceorig _querulous, complaining_, OEG.

ceorl m. _'churl,' layman, peasant, husbandman_, CP: _freeman of the
lowest class_, _LL_; AO, CP: _man_: _husband_, _Jn, WW_; CP: _hero,
noble man_.

ceorl¯æs (= ceorllêas) _unmarried (of women)_, LL 360, 73#b#.

ceorlboren _low-born, not noble_, LL.

ceorlfolc n. _common people_, Æ.

±ceorlian _to marry_ (of the woman), _LL, Mt_; Æ. ['_churl_']

ceorlic = ceorllic

ceorlisc (ie) _of a_ 'ceorl,' _'churlish,' common, rustic_, LL, WW. adv.
-lisce.

ceorliscnes f. _rudeness, vulgarity_.

ceorllic _common, belonging to the people generally_. adv. -lîce
_commonly, vulgarly_.

ceorlman m. _freeman_, LL 73; 463.

ceorlstrang _strong as a man_, WW 108^18.

ceorm = cirm

ceorran I. (sv^3) _to creak_, #Lcd# 160a. II. (+) = cierran

ceorung f. _murmuring_, Æ.

±cêosan^2 _to 'choose,' ('i-cheose'), seek out, select_, _AO_; Æ:
_decide, test_: _accept, approve_, _B, Gen_.

ceosel (i, y) m. _gravel, sand, shingle_, _Ep, Mt_; Æ. ['_chesil_']

ceoselb¯ære _gravelly, shingly_.

ceoselstân m. _sand-stone, gravel_, WW.

ceoslen (OEG 7^161), ceoslig (4^40) _gravelly_.

ceosol I. m? n? _gullet, maw_. II. = ceosel

±cêowan^2 _to 'chew,' gnaw_, _Æ, Soul_: _eat, consume_, Æ.

ceowl (NG) = cawl

cêowung (î, ý) f. '_chewing_,' _WW_ (î).

cêp = cêap

cêp- = cêap-, cýp-

  [[Printed on one line:
  cêp; cêp- = cêap; cêap-, cýp-]]

cêpan I. _to 'keep,' guard, observe, attend, look out for, take heed_,
_Æ, Lcd, Ps_: _take_, Æ: _avail oneself of, betake oneself to, take to,
bear_: _seek after, desire_, _Æ_: _meditate_: _regulate by_: _seize_,
_Æ_. II. = cýpan

cêpnian _to await eagerly_, NC 276.

cer = cierr

ceren I. (æ, y) n? _new wine, sweet wine_. [_L._ carenum] II. = cyrn
  [[under "cyrin"]]

cer-felle, -fille f. '_chervil_,' _Lcd, WW_. [_L._ cerefolium]

cerge = carig

cerlic = cirlic

cerm = cirm

cerr == cierr

cers- = cærs-

cert- = ceart-, cyrt-

certare _charioteer_, ÆL 18^295.

ceruphîn _cherubim_, #El# 750.

ces- = ceos-

cês- = cîs-, cýs-

cês = cêas pret. 3 sg. of cêosan.

Cêsar (AO) = Câsere

cester == ceaster

cestian = cystian

cête = cýte

cetel, cetil = citel

cêðan = cýðan

cewl (NG) = cawl

chor, chora m. _dance, choir (singers)_, CP: _church-choir (place)_.
[_L._ chorus]

chorglêo n. _dance_, #LPs#.

cîan sbpl. _gills_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ kieme]

cicel = cycel

cicen (y) n. '_chicken_,' _Mt, WW_.

cicene (Æ) = cycene

cicropisc _cyclopean_? WW 217^13.

+cîd n. _altercation_, CP, DR, GD.

±cîdan (w. d. or wið) _contend, quarrel_, _Æ, WW_: _complain_: _'chide,'
blame_, _Mk_; Æ, CP.

cîdde I. pret. 3 sg. of cîdan. II. = cýðde pret. 3 sg. of cýðan.

cîdung (ý) f. _chiding, rebuke_, AO.

ciefes = cifes

±cîegan (ê, î, ý) (tr.) _to call, name_, Æ (i): _call upon, invoke,
summon, convene_, CP: (intr.) _call out_.

cield (o) f. _cold_. [ceald]

ciele (e, i, y) m. _coolness, cold_, _'chill,' frost_, _Bl_; AO, CP.
[ceald]

cielegicel ¶ (y^1) m. _icicle_.

cielewearte (e^1, y^1) f. _goose-skin_, WW.

cielewyrt (y) f. _sorrel_.

cielf = cealf

cielle (i, y) f. _fire-pan, lamp_. [_OHG._ kella]

cîepa (e, i, y) m. _merchant, trader_, Æ.

cîepe = cîpe

cîepehûs (¯æ^1) n. _storehouse_, WW 186^11.

cîepemann (CP), cîepmann (LL) m. _merchant_.

cîepeðing (ê, ý) np. _goods, merchandise_.

cîeplic (ý) _for sale, vendible_, #Sc# 98^17.

cîepung (ê, î, ý) f. _marketing, trading_, CP: _market-place, market_:
_merchandise_: _market dues_.

cierice = cirice

cierlisc = ceorlisc

cierm = cirm

cierr (e, i, y) m. _turn, change, time, occasion_, _Æ, CP, Lk, Lcd_:
_affair, business_. æt sumum cierrc _at some time, once_. ['_chare_']

±cierran (eo, i, y) (tr. and intr.) _turn, change_, _Ps, Sat_: (intr.)
_turn oneself, go, proceed, turn back, return_, _Mt_; Æ: _convert, be
converted_, CP: _submit_, #Chr#, W: _make to submit, reduce_.
['_chare_,' '_i-cherre_']

+cierrednes (y) _conversion_, Æ: _entrance, admission_, RB.

±cierring (e, y) f. _conversion_, NC 341.

cîese = cîse

cîest, cîesð pres. 3 sg. of cêosan.

cifes (ie, e, y) f. _concubine, harlot_, AO. [_Ger._ kebse]

cifesboren adj. _bastard_, OEG 5042.

cifesdôm m. _fornication_, OEG 5042.

cifesgemâna m. _fornication_.

cifeshâd m. _fornication_, WW.

cîgan = cîegan

+cîgednes f. _calling_.

+cîgendlic _calling, vocative_, #ÆGr# 23^2.

cîgere (ei) _one who calls_, DR 194^1.

+cîgnes f. _calling, invocation, entreaty_: _name_, A 10·143^79.

±cîgung f. _calling, invocation_, NC 292.

cild (y) (nap. cild, cild-ra, -ru; gp. -ra) n. _'child,' infant_, _Mt,
Lcd_, _etc._; Æ, AO, CP: _a youth of gentle birth_, _KC_.

cildamæssedæg m. _Childermas, Innocents' Day_ (Dec. 28).

cildatrog = cildtrog

cildclâðas mp. _swaddling-clothes_.

cildcradol m. _cradle_, Æ.

cildfêdende _nursing_, MtR 24^19.

cild-fôstre, -fêstre f. _nurse_, _LL_. [v. '_foster_']

cildgeogoð f. _childhood_, ÆL 30^320.

cildgeong _youthful, infant_.

cildhâd m. '_childhood_,' _MkL_.

cildhama m. _womb_, Æ: _after-birth_.

cildisc '_childish_,' _Gen_.

cildiugoð = cildgeogoð

cildlic _childish, young_, _BH_; Æ. ['_childly_']

cildru v. cild.

cildsung f. _childishness_, LL.

cildtrog (cilt-, cilda-) m. _cradle_, #Gl#.

cile (AO) = ciele

cilforlamb n. _ewe-lamb_, _Æ, WW_.

cilian _to be cold_. [ciele]

cilic m. _sack-cloth of hair_, NG. [_L._ cilicium]

cille = cyll

cim- = cym-

cimbal, cimbala m. '_cymbal_,' _Lcd, VPs_. [_L._ cymbalum]

cimbalglîwere m. _cymbal-player_.

cimbing f. _commissure, joining_, WW 15^5; 206^12.

cimbîren n. _edge-iron_? (_joining-iron, clamp_? BT), LL 455[15].

cimbstân m. _base, pedestal_, #Sc# 226^2. [v. '_chimb_']

cin = (1) cinn; (2) cynn n.

cin- = cyn

cînan^1 _to gape, yawn, crack_.

cinbân n. _chin-bone, jaw-bone_, Æ.

cinberg f. _defence of the chin or cheek, cheek-guard_, #Ex# 175.
[beorg]

cincung f. _boisterous laughter_, WW 171^39.

cind = cynd

cine I. f. _sheet of parchment, folded, 'diploma,'_ Æ. II. f. _chink,
fissure, cavern_.

cine- = cyn(e)-

cineht (io) _chinky, cracked_, WW 43^37.

cing, cining = cyning

cinn I. n. '_chin_,' _WW_. II. = cynn n.

cinnan _to gape, yawn_? #Rim# 52.

cintôð m. _front tooth, grinder_, #Gl#.

cinu f. _chink, fissure_, _Æ, Bo, WW_. ['_chine_']

cio- = ceo-

cîo == cêo

cip = cipp

cîp- = cêap-, cîep-, cýp-

cîpe (îe) f. _onion_. [_L._ cepa]

cîpelêac n. _leek_, WW 380^29.

cipersealf f. _henna-ointment_, WW 205^11. [_L._ cypros]

cipp (y) m. _log, trunk_: _coulter, ploughshare_: _weaver's beam_, A
9·263.

cir = cierr

circ- = ciric-

circian _to roar_, #Lcd# 1·390^11 (v. A 31·56).

circolwyrde m. _computer, mathematician_, A 8·306.

circul m. _circle_: _cycle, zodiac_. [_L._ circulum]

circulâdl f. _the shingles_, #Lcd#.

cirebald (#An# 171) = cynebeald?

ciric¯æw nf. _marriage to the church_ (as when one takes orders), LL.

ciricbelle f. '_church-bell_,' _Lcd_.

ciricbôc f. _'church-book,' manual of the church services_, _W_.

ciricbôt f. _repair of churches_.

ciric-br¯æc f., -bryce m. _sacrilege_, Æ.

ciric-dor n., -duru _church-door_, LL.

cirice (ie, y) f. _'church,' religious community_, _Æ, BH, Mt_; CP:
_church (building)_, _temple_, _AO_; CP, Mdf: _congregation
(non-Christian)_, _Ps_.

ciricend m. _an ecclesiastic_.

ciricfrið mn. _right of sanctuary_: _penalty for breach of the right_,
v. LL 2·537.

ciricfultum m. _support from the church_.

ciricgang (y) m. _going to church_, LL 473[7]: _churching, purification
(of the B.V.M.)_, CM 484.

ciricgemâna (y) m. _church-membership_, W 103^23.

ciricgeorn _zealous in church-going_.

ciricgeriht n. _church-due_.

ciricgrið (y) n. _church-peace, right of sanctuary_, _LL_: _penalty for
breach of the right_, LL 263[3]; v. 2·537. ['_church-grith_']

cirichâd m. _an order of the church_, LL.

cirichâlgung f. _consecration of a church_.

cirichata m. _church-tormentor, persecutor_, W.

ciricland (y) n. _land of the church_, GD.

ciriclic _ecclesiastical_, _BH, Chr_. ['_churchly_']

ciricm¯ærsung (y) f. _dedication of a church_, W 277^10.

ciricmangung f. _simony_, LL.

ciricmitta m. _church measure (of ale)_, TC 144^33.

ciricnêod f. _requirements of the church_.

ciricnytt f. _church service_, #Cra# 91.

ciricragu f. _church-lichen or moss_, #Lcd# 51b.

ciricrên (y^1) n. _sacrilege_, LL 254#k#. [rân]

ciricsang m. _hymn_: _church-singing_.

ciricsangere m. _church-singer_, BH 466^17.

ciricsceat m. _'church-scot,' church-due at Martinmas_, _BH, W_.

ciricsceatweorc n. _work connected with the grain given as
church-scot_, KC.

ciricsôcn (y^1) f. _church-privilege, sanctuary_, LL: _territory of a
church_: _attendance at church_.

cirictîd f. _service-time_, LL.

cirictûn m. _churchyard_, LL.

ciricðên m. _minister of a church_, LL.

ciricðênung f. _church-duty or service_.

ciricðing n. _object belonging to a church_, LL 381[27].

ciricðingere m. _priest_, WW 155^29 (yrc).

ciricwæcce f. _vigil_, LL.

ciricw¯æd f. _vestment_, LL 258[51].

ciricwâg m. _wall of a church_, LL.

ciricwaru f. _congregation_, LL 400´; 2·539.

ciricweard (e^2, y^2) m. _churchwarden, sexton_, Æ.

cirisbêam m. _cherry-tree_, #Gl#. [_L._ cerasum]

cirlic I. (e, y) _charlock_. II. = ciriclic

cirlisc = ceorlisc

cirm (e, ea, eo, ie, y) m. _cry, shout, outcry, uproar_, _MtR, WW_.
['_chirm_']

cirman (e, y) _to cry, cry out, call, shriek_, _Gu, Jud_. ['_chirm_']

cirnel (#Gl#) = cyrnel

cirps (y) _curly_. ['_crisp_']

±cirpsian _to crisp, curl_.

cirr == cierr

cîs _fastidious_. [cêosan]

cîse (¯æ, ê, ý) m. '_cheese_,' _WW_. [For compounds, v. also cýs-]

cisel, cisil == ceosel

ciseræppel m. _dried fig_, WW 367^2. [= ciris-?, _cherry_ (BT)]

ciser-bêam, cisir- = cirisbêam

cîsnes f. _fastidiousness_.

cist (e, y) I. f. _'chest,' casket_, _Gl, JnR_: _coffin_, _BH, Lk_:
_rush basket_, _WW_: _horn_ (_as receptacle_?), WW. II. = cyst I.

cîst pres. 3 sg. of cêosan.

ciste = cist I.

cistenbêam m. _chestnut-tree_, #Gl#. [_L._ castanea]

cîstmêlum _earnestly_, OEG 4^32. [cêast]

citel m. _'kettle,' cauldron_, _Ep_ (e), _Lcd_ (y).

citelhrum (e^1) m. _kettle-soot_.

citelian v. _to tickle_.

citelung f. _tickling_, _WW_ 278^6. ['_kittling_']

citere, citre (y) f. _cithara_, #CJVPs#.

cîð m. _seed, germ, shoot_, _Æ_: _mote_, CP. ['_chithe_']

cîðfæst _well-rooted_, ÆH 304^26.

cîwung = cêowung

clâ = clêa, clawu

clâbre (#Gl#) = cl¯æfre

clac- = clæc-, cleac-

clacu f. _injury_, W 86^10.

+clâded (MkL 5^15) pp. of +clâðian.

cladersticca m. _rattle-stick_, #Gl#.

clæclêas _harmless_.

clædur (ea) _rattle_, #Gl#. [clader]

cl¯æferwyrt f. _clover_, #Lcd#.

cl¯æfre f. _'clover' trefoil_, _Lcd, WW_; Mdf.

cl¯æg m. '_clay_,' _WW_.

cl¯æig '_clayey_,' _Ct_.

±cl¯æman _to smear, caulk, plaster, anoint_, _Æ, Lcd_. ['_cleam_']

cl¯æming f. _blotting, smearing_, #ÆGr# 256^4.

clæmman (= clem-) _to press_, GD.

clæmnes f. _torture_, BH 290^2.

cl¯æne (â, ê) I. '_clean_,' _CP, Lk, Æ_: _pure, chaste, innocent_, _Æ,
Bl_: _clear, open_, _El, Lcd, Ps_. on cl¯ænum felda _in the open field
(of battle)_, CP 227^25: _honourable, true_: _acute, sagacious,
intellectual_. II. adv. _clean, clearly, fully, purely, entirely_, _Æ,
Ct_; AO, CP.

cl¯ængeorn _yearning after purity, celibate_.

cl¯ænheort _pure in heart_, Æ.

cl¯ænlic _('cleanly'), pure_, _Bo, Met_: _excellent_. adv. -lîce = cl¯æne

cl¯ænnes f. _(moral) 'cleanness,' purity, chastity_, _BH_; Æ, CP.

cl¯ænsere (e) m. _priest_, CP 139^15; W 72^6.

±cl¯ænsian (sn-) _to 'cleanse,' purify, chasten_, CP: _clear out, purge_,
_Lcd_: (w a. and g.) _justify, clear oneself_.

cl¯ænsnian = cl¯ænsian

cl¯ænsung f. _'cleansing,' purifying, chastening, castigation,
expiation_, _Mk_; Æ: _purity, chastity_.

cl¯ænsungdæg m. _day for purging_, #Lcd# 1·330^8.

cl¯ænsungdrenc (sn) m. _purgative_, MH 72^27.

clæppettan _to palpitate_.

clæppetung f. _clapping_; _pulsation, pulse_, Æ.

clæppian (a^1) _to clap, beat, throb_.

cl¯æsn- = cl¯æns-

cl¯æð == clâð

clæweða = cleweða

clâf pret. 3 sg. of clîfan.

clâfre (#Gl#) = cl¯æfre

clâm I. m. _paste, mortar, mud, clay_, _Æ, Lcd_: _poultice_. ['_cloam_']
II. = clêam dp. of clêa.

clamb pret. 3 sg. of climban.

clamm m. _band, bond, fetter, chain_, _An, Bl, Rd_: _grip, grasp_.
[v. '_clam_']

clân- = cl¯æn-

clang pret. 3 sg. of clingan.

clappian = clæppian

clâsnian (#VPs#) = cl¯ænsian

clâtacrop = clâte

clâte f. _bur, burdock, clivers_, _Gl, Lcd_. ['_clote_'; _Ger._ klette]

clatrung i. _clattering, noise_.

clâð m. _'cloth_,' '_clothes,' covering, sail_, _BH, Chr, Jn, Lcd_; AO,
CP. under Crîstes clâðum _in baptismal garments_, #Chr# 688#e#.

+clâðian (cl¯æðan) _to 'clothe,'_ _NG_.

clâðwêoce f. _wick of cloth_, GPH 391.

clauster = clûstor

clâwan^7 _to claw_, Æ.

clâwian _to scratch, 'claw,'_ _ÆGr_ 170^11n.

clawu f. nap. clawe '_claw_,' _Æ, Gl, Ph_: _hoof_, _Æ_: _hook_, Æ: (pl.)
_pincers_?

clâwung f. _griping pain_, #Lcd#.

clea- = clæ-, cleo-

clêa = clawu

cleac f. _stepping-stone_, KC 4·36. [_Celtic_]

cleacian _to hurry_, Æ.

clêaf pret. 3 sg. of clêofan.

clêm- = cl¯æm-

clên- = cl¯æn-

-clencan v. be-c.

clengan _to adhere_, _Rd_ 29^8. ['_clenge_']

cleo- = cli-

clêo- = clîe-, clû-

clêo = clêa, clawu

cleofa (ea, i, y) m. _cave, den_: _cell, chamber, cellar_, _Æ, BH_.
['_cleve_']

clêofan^2 _to 'cleave,' split, separate_, _A, Br, Ct, GPH_.

cleofian = clifian

cleofu = nap. of clif.

clêofung f. '_cleaving_,' _WW_.

clêone = clêowene, ds. of clêowen, clîewen.  [[under "clîewen"]]

cleop- = clip-

clep- = clæp-, cleop-, clip-

clerc == cleric

cler-ic (-ec, -oc; clerus, #PPs# 67^13) m. _'clerk' in holy orders_,
_WW_: _clerk in minor orders_, _LL_. [_L._ clericus]

clerichâd m. _condition of a (secular) clerk, clerical order,
priesthood_.

cleweða (æ^1) m. _itch_, CP 71^19. [clâwan]

clib- = clif-

clibbor _clinging_, #Men# 245. [clifian]

+clibs (e; cleps; clæsp, y) _clamour_, CP.

clid-ren, -rin f. _clatter_.

cliepian = clipian

clîewen, cliewen? (eo, io, i, y) n. _sphere, ball, ball of thread or
yarn, skein_, _Æ, CP, Ph, WW_: _mass, group_. ['_clue_']

clif n. (nap. cleofu, clifu) _'cliff,' rock, promontory_, _An, B, Ct_;
Æ, CP.

clifa = cleofa

clifæhtig = clifihtig  [[under "clifig"]]

clîfan^1 _to 'cleave,' adhere_, _Æ, CP_.

clife f. _'clivers,' burdock_, _Lcd, WW_.

clifeht = clifiht  [[under "clifig"]]

clifer m. nap. clifras _claw_, Æ.

cliferfête _cloven-footed_, ÆL 25^79.

clif-hlêp, -hlýp m. _a cliff-leap, plunge to ruin_? (BT), #Gl#.

clifian (eo, y) _to adhere_, Æ, CP.

clifig, clif-iht, -ihtig _steep_, #Gl#.

clifr- v. clifer.

clifrian _to scarify, scratch_, Æ.

clifrung f. _clawing, talon_, GPH 398.

clifstân m. _rock_, WW 371^23.

clifwyrt f. _cliff-wort, water-wort, foxglove_, WW 134^3 and #n#.

+cliht pp. of +*cliccan, clyccan.

-clîm v. calwer-c.  [[under "calwerclîm"]]

climban^3 (y) _to 'climb,'_ _Sol_.

climpre = clympre

clincig _rough_.

clingan^3 _to stick together_, _An_: _shrink, wither, pine_, _Æ_.
['_cling_']

clipian (e, eo, y) (tr. and intr.) _to speak, cry out, call_, _Mt, Jn,
Ps_; CP: (±) _summon, invoke_, Æ; (w. d.) _cry to, implore_. ['_clepe_']

clipigendlic (y) _vocalic_, #ÆGr# 5: _vocative_ (gram.), #ÆGr# 23.

clipol _sounding, vocal_: _vocalic_.

clipung (e, eo, y) f. _cry, crying, clamour_, _MtR_: (±) _prayer_, #Ps#:
_call, claim_, #Chr#, 1129. ðâ clypunga _kalends_. ['_cleping_']

clipur m. _bell-clapper_.

cliroc = cleric

+clistre = +clystre  [[under "clyster"]]

clite f. _coltsfoot_, #Lcd# 146a.

cliða (eo, y) m. _poultice_.

-clîðan v. æt-c.

cliðe f. _burdock_.

cliðwyrt f. _'rubea minor,' clivers_, #Lcd# 173b.

clîwe, clîwen = clîewen

cloccettan _to palpitate_, #Lcd#.

cloccian _to cluck, make a noise, rumble_, A 8·309.

clodhamer m. _fieldfare_, WW 287^17. [v. '_clod_,' and Mdf]

clof- = cluf-

+clofa m. _counterpart (of a document)_, CC 80. [clêofan]

clofe f. _buckle_, #Gl#.

clofen pp. of clêofan.

clomm I. m. = clamm. II. pret. 3 sg. of climban.

clop m? _rock_? v. Mdf.

clott _lump, mass_, _HGl_ 488. ['_clot_']

clucge f. _bell_, BH 340^6.

clûd m. _mass of stone, rock_, _Æ, AO_: _hill_, ES 38·18. ['_cloud_']

clûdig _rocky, hilly_, _AO_. ['_cloudy_']

clufeht (i^2) _bulbous_, #Lcd#.

clufon pret. pl. of clêofan.

clufðung, clufðunge f. _crowfoot_: _a vegetable poison_, v. OEG 896.

clufu f. _clove (of garlic, etc.)_, _bulb, tuber_. [clêofan]

clufwyrt f. _'batrachion,' buttercup_, _Lcd_. ['_clovewort_']

clugge = clucge

clumben pp. of climban.

clumian, clummian _to murmur, mumble, mutter_.

clungen pp. of clingan.

clûs, clûse f. _bar, bolt_: _enclosure_: _cell, prison_. [_L._ clausum]

cluster = clyster

clûster = clûstor

clûstor n. _lock, bar, barrier_: _enclosure, cloister, cell, prison_.
[_L._ claustrum]

clûstorcleofa m. _prison-cell_, #An# 1023.

clûstorloc n. _prison_, #Gl#.

clût m. _'clout,' patch, cloth_, _Ep_: _piece of metal, plate_, _Æ_.

+clûtod _'clouted,' patched_, _Æ_.

±clyccan _to 'clutch,' clench_, _IM, Sc_.

clyf = clif

clyf- = clif-, cleof-

+clyfte adj. _cleft_, GPH 393. [clêofan]

clymmian _to climb, ascend_, #Sol# 414.

-clympe v. calwer-c.  [[under "calwerclîm"]]

clympre m. _lump of metal_.

clyne n. _lump of metal_.

clynian I. _to roll up, enfold_, GPH. II. = clynnan

clynnan (intr.) _to resound, ring_, #El# 51: (tr.) _knock_, NG.

clyp- = clip-

clypnes f. _embrace_, BH 238^3.

clypp m., clypping f. _embracing_.

±clyppan _to embrace, clasp_: _surround, enclose_, _VPs_: _grip_, _Gen_:
_prize, honour, cherish_, _Æ, MkLR_ (io), _CP_. ['_clip_']

-clýsan v. be-c. [clûse]  [[under "clûs"]]

+clysp = +clibs

clyster, +clystre n. _'cluster,' bunch, branch_, _Æ, Cp, WW_.

clýsung f. _enclosure, apartment_, Æ: _closing, period, conclusion of a
sentence, clause_.

clyða = cliða

clýwen = clîewen

cnæht (_NG_) = cniht

cnæpling m. _youth_, Æ. [cnapa]  [[under "cnafa"]]

cnæpp (e) m. _top, summit_, _Æ, Lk_: _fibula, button_, WW. ['_knap_']

+cn¯æwe (w. g.) _conscious of, acknowledging_, Æ: _known, notorious,
manifest_, Æ.

cnæwð pres. 3 sg. of cnâwan.

cnafa, cnapa m. _child, youth_, _Æ, Sc_: _servant_, _Æ, Mt, Ps_.
['_knape_,' '_knave_']

±cnâwan^7 (usu. +) _to know, perceive_, _Æ, B, Jul, OEG_.

cnâwel¯æcing f. _acknowledgement_, KC 4·193^12.

cnâwl¯æc (ê^2) _knowledge_, ES 42·176.

+cnâwnes f. _acknowledgement_, EC 265^2.

cnêa gp. of cnêo(w).

cnearr m. _small ship, galley (of the ships of the Northmen)_, ¶#Chr#.
[_ON._ knorr]

±cnêatian _to argue, dispute_.

cnêatung f. _inquisition, investigation_: _dispute, debate_.

cnedan^5 _to knead_, _Lcd, LkL_.

cneht = cniht

cnêo == cnêow

cnêodan = cnôdan

cneoht = cniht

+cneord _eager, zealous, diligent_.

±cneordl¯æcan _to be diligent_, Æ.

cneordlic _diligent, earnest, zealous_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

±cneordnes f. _zeal, diligence, study_, #Gl#.

cnêordnes = +cnêorenes

+cnêor-enes, -ednes f. _generation, race_.

cnêores = cnêoriss  [[under "cnêorisn"]]

cnêorift n? _napkin_ (BT). _kneehose_? (Kluge), #Gl#.

cnêorisbôc f. _Genesis_, WW 414^29.

cnêorisn (#Bl#), cneoris(s), cneornis(s) f. _generation, posterity,
family, tribe, nation, race_.

cneorðl¯æcan = cneordl¯æcan

cnêow I. (êo) n. '_knee_,' _AO, Bl, El, Mt_: _step in a pedigree,
generation_, Æ. II. pret. 3 sg. of cnâwan.

cnêowbîgung f. _kneeling, genuflection_.

cnêow-ede, -ade _having big knees_, WW.

cnêowgebed n. _prayer on one's knees_, Æ.

cnêowholen m. _'knee-holly,' butcher's broom_, #Lcd#.

cnêowian (±) _to kneel_, _Æ_: _know carnally_, ÆL 12^7. ['_knee_']

cnêowlian _to 'kneel,'_ _LL_.

cnêowm¯æg m. nap. -m¯ægas, -mâgas _kinsman, relation, ancestor_.

cnêowrîm ¶ n. _progeny, family_.

cnêowsibb f. _generation, race_ (BDS 8·527).

cnêowung f. _kneeling, genuflection_, CM.

cnêowwærc m. _pain in the knees_, #Lcd#.

cnêowwyrst f. _knee-joint_, WW.

cnepp = cnæpp

cnêw == cnêow

cnîdan^1 _to beat_, MtR 21^35.

cnieht = cniht

cnîf m. _knife_, _WW_.

cniht (e, eo, ie, y) m. _boy, youth_, _AO, Bl, LL_: _servant, attendant,
retainer, disciple, warrior_, _Chr, Mt, Met_: _boyhood_, _ÆGr_.
['_knight_']

cnihtcild (eo^1) n. _male child, boy_.

cnihtgebeorðor n. _child-birth, child-bearing_, #Bl#.

cnihtgeong _youthful_, #El# 640.

cnihthâd m. _puberty_, _'youth,' boyhood_, _Æ, Bo_; AO: _(male)
virginity_. ['_knighthood_']

cnihtiugoð f. _youth_, A 8·299.

cnihtlêas _without an attendant_, Æ.

cnihtlic _boyish, childish_, _Guth_. ['_knightly_']

cnihtðêawas mp. _boyish ways_, GD 111^9.

cnihtwesende ¶ _when a boy, as a youth_.

cnihtwîse f. _boyishness_.

cnissan = cnyssan

cnîtian _to dispute_, #Sc# 51^12.

cnittan = cnyttan

cnocian = cnucian

±cnôdan (êo) _to attribute to, assign to, load with_, CP.

cnoll m. '_knoll_,' _Ps_; Mdf: _summit_, _Æ, Bo_.

cnop '_ballationes_,' WW 8^28; 357^32.

-cnoppa v. wull-c.

+cnos n. _collision_, WW 376^2. [cnyssan]

cnôsl n. _stock, progeny, kin, family_: _native country_.

cnossian _to strike, hit upon_, #Seaf# 8.

cnotm¯ælum '_strictim_,' A 13·35^201.

cnotta m. _'knot,' fastening_, _Æ_: _knotty point, puzzle_, _Æ_.

±cnucian _to 'knock' (door)_, _Æ, Mt_: _beat, pound_, _IM, Lcd_ (o).

cnûian, cnûwian _to pound_.

+cnycc n. _bond_, DR.

±cnyccan pret. 3 sg. cnycte, cnyhte _to tie_.

+cnycled _bent, crooked_, WW 458^33.

cnyht = cniht

cnyll m. _sound or signal of a bell_, _RB, WW_. ['_knell_']

±cnyllan _to toll a bell_: _strike, knock_, _LkR, MtL_. ['_knell_']

cnyllsian (LkL) = cnyllan

cnyrd- = cneord-

±cnyssan _to press, toss, strike, hew to pieces, dash, crash
(together)_, _beat_, Æ, AO, CP: _overcome, overwhelm, oppress_, CP.

cnyssung f. _striking, stroke_, #ÆGr#.

±cnyttan _to fasten, tie, bind, 'knit'_ ('_i-knit_,' _Mt, WW_), _Æ,
Lcd_; CP. [cnotta]

cnyttels m. _string, sinew_, OEG 2935.

coc = cocc

côc m. '_cook_,' _Æ, Ps_; CP. [_L._ coquus]

cocc m. _cock, male bird_, _Æ, Lcd, Mt_; CP, Mdf.

coccel m. _'cockle,' darnel, tares_, _Mt_.

cocer m. _quiver, case, sheath_: _sword, spear_.

cocerflâ f. '_framea_,' #APs# 16^13.

côcerpanne f. _cooking-pan, frying-pan_.

+côcnian (côca-) _to season food_.

côcnung f. _seasoning_, #Lcd#.

cocor = cocer

côcormete m. _seasoned food_, WW 281^6.

+côcsian _to cook, roast_, #RPs# 101^4.

côcunung = côcnung

cocur (Æ) = cocer

codd m. _'cod,' husk_, _Lcd_: _bag_, _Mt_: _scrotum_.

coddæppel m. _quince_, WW 411^15.

codic (coydic) _'lapsana,' charlock_? A 37·47.

coe- = ce-

côe- (N) = cê-

cofa m. _closet, chamber_: _ark_: _cave, den_. ['_cove_']

cofgodas mp. _household gods_, #Gl#.

cofincel n. _little chamber_, WW.

-cofrian v. â-c.

cohhetan _to make a noise, cough_? #Jud# 270.

col n., nap. colu, cola _'coal,' live coal_, _Æ, CP, Lcd, VPs_.

côl I. _'cool,' cold_, _B, Bo, Lcd_: _tranquil, calm_. II. pret. 3 sg.
of calan.

-colc v. ôden-, wîn-c.

côlcwyld f. _'frigida pestis,' ague_? WW 243^11.

côlian _to 'cool,' grow cold, be cold_, _An, Gu, Lcd_.

coliandre f. _coriander_, #Lcd#.

côll = côl

-colla v. morgen-c.

collecta f. _collect_, CM, LL.

+collenferhtan _to make empty, exhaust_.

collen-ferhð, -fyrhð, -ferð ¶ _proud, elated, bold_. [*cwellan
(_to swell_)?]

colloncrog m. _water-lily, nymphæa_.

colmâse f. _'coal-mouse,' tit-mouse_, _WW_.

côlnes f. '_coolness_,' _Ps_.

colpytt m. _(char-)coal pit_, Ct.

colsweart _coal-black_, NC 277.

colt m. '_colt_,' _Æ_.

coltetræppe f. _a plant, 'caltrop,'_ _WW_.

coltgræg f? _colt's-foot_, WW 136^18.

coltræppe = coltetræppe

col-ðr¯æd, -ðrêd m. _plumb-line_, #Gl#.

columne f. _column_.

côm pret. 3 sg. of cuman.

coman (AO 70^24) = cuman

comb = camb

combol = cumbol

comêta m. _comet_, ¶#Chr# 975. [_L._]

commuc = cammoc

cômon pret. pl. of cuman.

comp == camp

con = can pres. 1, 3 sg. of cunnan.

condel = candel

conn = cann pres. 1, 3 sg. of cunnan.

consolde f. _comfrey_. [_L._]

const = canst pres. 2 sg. of cunnan.

consul m. _consul_, AO. [_L._]

coorte f. _cohort_, AO. [_L._]

cop = copp

côp m? _'ependytes,' cope, vestment_.

+côp _proper, fitting_, CP.

copel _unsteady, rocking_? (BT), BC 3·624.

côpenere m. _lover_, CP.

coper, copor n. '_copper_,' _Lcd_. [_L._ cuprum]

copian _to plunder, steal_, WW 379^17.

+côplic _proper, fitting_. adv. -lîce.

copp I. m. _top, summit_, _HGl_. ['_cop_'] II. m. _cup_, _NG_. ['_cop_']

-coppe v. âtor-c.

copped _polled, lopped, pollard_, Ct.

cops (_WW_) == cosp

+cor n. _decision_. [cêosan]

corcîð m. _increase_? _choice growth_? #Lcd# 3·212^9 (v. A 31·56).

cordewânere m. _'cordwainer,' shoemaker_, _EC_. [_OFr._]

±coren (pp. of cêosan) _chosen, elect, choice, fit_, Æ: _precious,
dear_.

corenbêg m. _crown_, A 9·172. [_L._ corona]

±corenes f. _choice, election_: (+) _goodness_.

+corenlic _elegant_. adv. -lîce, WW.

±corenscipe m. _election, excellence_.

corfen pp. of ceorfan.

corflian _to mince_. [ceorfan]

corn n. _'corn,' grain_, _Chr, CP_; Æ, AO: _seed, berry_, _CP, Jn, Lcd_;
Æ: _a corn-like pimple, corn_.

cornæsceda fp. _chaff_, WW 118^1.

cornappla np. _pomegranates_, OEG.

corn-b¯ære, -berende _corn-bearing_.

corngebrot n. _corn dropped in carrying to barn_, LL 451[17].

cornges¯ælig _rich in corn_, #Lcd#.

corngesceot n. _payment in corn_, Ct.

cornhûs n. _granary_, WW 185^28.

cornhwicce f. _corn-bin_, Æ.

cornlâd f. _leading of corn_, LL 453[21,4].

corns¯æd n. _a grain of corn_, GD 253^1.

corntêoðung f. _tithe of corn_, W.

corntrêow n. _cornel-tree_, WW.

corntrog m. _corn-bin_, WW 107^1.

cornuc, cornuch = cranoc

cornwurma m. _scarlet dye_, #Gl#.

corôna m. _crown_. [_L._]

+corônian _to crown_, #PPs# 5^13.

corsn¯æd f. _piece of consecrated bread which an accused person swallowed
as a test of innocence_, LL.

corðor ¶, corðer ¶ fn. _troop, band, multitude, throng, retinue_:
_pomp_.

corwurma = cornwurma

cos = coss

cosp m. _fetter, bond_, _Bo_. ['_cops_']

+cospende, +cosped _fettered_, #LPs#.

coss m. _'kiss,' embrace_, _Æ, Lk, WW_.

cossetung f. _kissing_, NG.

cossian _to 'kiss,'_ _Æ_.

cost I. m. _option, choice, possibility_: _manner, way_, _DR_:
_condition_. ðæs costes ðe _on condition that_. ['_cost_'; v. NC 341]
II. (±) ¶_tried, chosen, excellent_. [cêosan] III. m? _costmary, tansy_,
_Lcd_. ['_cost_']

costere I. m? _spade, shovel_, WW 106^18. II. = costnere

±costian (w. g. or a., also intr.) _to tempt, try, prove, examine_, AO,
CP. [_Ger._ kosten]

costigend m. _tempter_.

costnere m. _tempter_, Æ.

+costnes f. _proving, temptation, trial_, BH 218^10.

costnian = costian

costnigend = costigend

costnungstôw f. _place of temptation_.

±costung, costnung f. _temptation, testing, trial, tribulation_, _Mt_;
Æ, CP. ['_costnung_']

cot (AO) n. (nap. cotu); cote f. _'cot,' cottage, bedchamber, den_, _AO,
Lk, Mt_; Mdf.

cotesetla = cotsetla

cotlîf n. _hamlet, village, manor_, _Chr_: _dwelling_. ['_cotlif_']

cotsetla m. _cottager_, _LL_. ['_cotsetla_']

cott = cot

cottuc, cotuc m. _mallow_, #Gl#.

coða m., coðe f. = coðu

coðig _diseased_.

coðlîce _ill, miserably_, #Met# 25^36.

côðon (AO) = cûðon pret. pl. of cunnan.

coðu f. _disease, sickness_, _Æ, Chr, Lcd_. ['_cothe_']

+cow n. _thing to be chewed, food_, NC 292.

cowen pp. of cêowan.

crâ n? _croaking_, WW 208^10.

crabba m. '_crab_,' _WW_: _Cancer (sign of the zodiac)_, _Lcd_.

cracelung? '_crepacula_,' OEG 56^249.

crâcettan = cr¯æcettan

cracian _to resound, 'crack,'_ _Ps_.

cradol, cradel m. _'cradle,' cot_, _WW_.

cradolcild n. _child in the cradle, infant_, W 158^14.

cr¯æ = crâwe  [[under "crâwa"]]

cr¯æcettan _to croak_, GD 118^25. [crâ]

cr¯æcetung f. _croaking_.

cræf- = craf-

cræft m. _physical strength, might, courage_, _A, AO, Sol_: _science,
skill, art, ability, talent, virtue, excellence_, _Bo_; Æ, CP: _trade,
handicraft, calling_, _BH, CP, RB_; Æ: _work or product of art_, _Hex_:
_trick, fraud, deceit_, #Bl#: _machine, instrument_. ['_craft_']

cræfta = cræftiga

±cræftan _to exercise a craft, build_: _bring about, contrive_, Æ.

cræftelîce = cræftlîce

+cræftgian _to strengthen, render powerful_, AO.

cræftglêaw _skilful, wise_, ¶#Chr# 975.

cræf-t(i)ca, -t(e)ga = cræftiga

cræftig _strong, powerful_, _AO_: _skilful, cunning, ingenious_, _Bl_:
_learned, instructive_, A 8·321: _knowing a craft, scientific_:
_virtuous_. ['_crafty_']

cræftiga m. _craftsman, artificer, workman, architect_, Æ, CP.

cræftiglîce _skilfully_.

cræftlêas _artless, unskilful_.

cræftlic _artificial_, A 8·317: _skilful_. adv. -lîce.

cræftwyrc n. _clever workmanship_.

cræt n. nap. cratu, creatu _cart, waggon, chariot_, Æ.

crætehors n. _cart-horse_, WW 108^24.

crætw¯æn m. _chariot_, AO.

crætwîsa m. _charioteer_, ÆL 18^295.

cr¯æwð pres. 3 sg. of crâwan.

crafian (æ) _to 'crave,' ask, implore, demand_, _Chr, LL_: _summon_,
_Lcd_.

crafing (æ) f. _claim, demand_, TC 644.

±crammian _to 'cram,' stuff_, _ÆGr_.

crammingpohha m. '_viscarium_,' NC.

crampul m. _crane-pool_. [= cran, pôl]

cran m. '_crane_,' _WW_.

crancstæf m. _weaving implement, crank_, LL 455[15].

crang pret. 3 sg. of cringan.

cranic m. _record, chronicle_. [_L._]

cranicwrîtere m. _chronicler_, OEG 7^24.

cranoc m. _crane_. [_Ger._ kranich]

crâs f. _food, dainty_, #Nar# 11^14.

crat (WW 140^31) = cræt

cratu v. cræt.

crâwa m., crâwe f. _'crow,' raven_, _Gl, Ps_.

±crâwan^7 _to 'crow,'_ _Mt_; CP.

crâwan-lêac (crâw-) n. _crow-garlic_.

crêac- = crêc-

crêad pret. 3 sg. of crûdan.

creaft- = cræft-

crêap pret. 3 sg, of crêopan.

crêas _fine, elegant_, NC 277.

crêaslic _dainty, rich_. v. NC 277.

crêasnes f. _elegance_: _presumption, elation_, OEG 1108.

creat = cræt

Crêcas mp. _the 'Greeks,'_ _AO, BH_.

Crêce = Crêcas

Crêcisc _Grecian, Greek_, AO.

crêda m. _creed, belief, confession of faith_, Æ. [_L._ credo]

credic? _a bowl_, OEG 29^3.

creft (AS) == cræft

crencestre f. _female weaver, spinster_. [cranc]
  [[only in compound "crancstæf"]]

±crêopan^2 (occly. refl.) _to creep, crawl_, _Æ, Bo_; AO, CP.

creopel = crypel

crêopere m. _cripple_. ['_creeper_']

crêopung f. '_creeping_,' _Gl_.

crêow pret. 3 sg. of crâwan.

crepel = crypel

cressa m. (#Gl#), cresse f. = cærse

cribb (y) f. _'crib,' stall_, _Cr_ 1426.

cricc = crycc

crîde pret. 3 sg. of crîgan.

crîgan? _to bubble up_. v. OEG 7·101.

±crimman^3 _to cram, put in, insert_: _crumble_.

crinc '_cothurnus_,' ZDA 33·250^2.

crincan = cringan

cring (gr-) _downfall, slaughter_. #El# 115.

±cringan^3 _to yield, fall (in battle)_, _die_.

cringwracu (gr-) f. _torment_, #Jul# 265.

crippan = cryppan

crîpð pres. 3 sg of crêopan.

crisma m. _chrism, holy oil_: _chrisome-cloth_: _anointing_.

crismal m? n? _chrismale_, W 36^17.

crismhâlgung f. _consecration of the chrism_.

crismlîsing (ý^2) f. _chrism-loosing, loosing of the chrismale,
confirmation_, #Chr#.

crisp (_BH_) = cirps ['_crisp_']

Crîst m. _anointed one, Christ_, Æ, CP.

cristalla m. _crystal_, Æ.

cristallisc _of crystal_, A 4·143.

crîstelm¯æl = crîstesm¯æl

crîstelm¯ælbêam m. _tree surmounted by a cross_? _upright shaft of a
cross_? EC 385´.

crîsten '_Christian_,' _AO, BH_; Æ. ðâ crîstnan = _the English as
opposed to the Danes_, #Chr# 894.

crîsten m. crîst(e)na f. '_Christian_,' _AO_.

crîstendôm m. _'Christendom,' the church, Christianity_, _AO_; Æ.

crîstenlic _Christian_, DR.

crîstenmann m. _a Christian_, MH 170^25.

crîstennes f. _Christianity_: _Christian baptism_, LL 412[1]; 413[13a].

crîstes-m¯æl (#Chr#), -mêl mn. _(Christ's mark), the cross_. wyrcan c.
_to make the sign of the cross_.

crîstlic _Christian_, LL.

crîstmæsse f. _Christmas_, #Chr# 1021#d#.

crîstna = crîsten

crîstnere m. _catechist_.

crîstnes = crîstennes

±crîstnian _to anoint with chrism (as a catechumen)_, _'christen,'
baptize, catechize_, _BH_.

crîstnung f. _christening, anointing with chrism or holy oil_, W 33^16.

crîð = crîgeð (v. crîgan)?

crocc f., crocca m. _'crock,' pot, vessel_, _Lcd_.

crocchwer? m. _earthen pot_, OEG 4672.

crôced = crôged

+crôcod _crooked, bent_, NC 292.

crocsceard n. _potsherd_, Æ.

crocwyrhta m. _potter_, #ÆGr#.

+crod n. _crowd, throng_.

croden pp. of crûdan.

croft m. _croft, small field_.

crôg m. _crock, pitcher, vessel_, #Gl#.

crôgcynn n. _kind of vessel, wine-jar_, WW 210^39.

+crôged (ôc) '_croceus, coccineus_,' OEG 5204.

croh m. _saffron_.

crôh I. m. _shoot, twig, tendril_. II. = crôg

crohha = crocca  [[under "crocc"]]

croma = cruma

crompeht _'placenta,' a flat cake_, ES 42·174; A 37·48.

crong = crang, pret. 3 sg. of cringan.

crop = cropp

cropen pp. of crêopan.

crop-lêac, -lêc n. _garlic_.

cropp, croppa m. _cluster, bunch_: _sprout, flower, berry, ear of corn_,
_Ep, LkL, WW_: _'crop' (of a bird)_, _Æ_: _kidney_; _pebble_.

croppiht _clustered_, #Lcd# 38b.

crûc m. _cross_, _Lcd_, LV 74. ['_crouch_']

crûce f. _pot, pitcher_, #Gl#.

crucethûs n. _torture-chamber_, #Chr# 1137.

crûdan^2 ¶ _to press, hasten, drive_.

cruft m? crufte f. _crypt_. [_L._]

cruma (o) m. _'crumb,' fragment_, _Mt, WW_.

crumb, crump _crooked, bent, stooping_, _Gl_. ['_crump_'; _Ger._ krumm]

crumen (crumm-) pp. of crimman.

cruncon pret. pl. of crincan.

crundel mn. _ravine_, Mdf.

crungen pp. of cringan.

crupon pret. pl. of crêopan.

crûse f? _cruse_, A 37·50.

crûsene, crûsne f. _fur coat_, #Gl#. [cp. _Ger._ kürschner]

crybb = cribb

crycc f. _'crutch,' staff_, _BH_; Æ.

cryccen _made of clay_, GPH 398.

crýdeð pres. 3 sg. of crûdan.

crymbing f. _curvature, bend, inclination_, WW 382^2. [crumb]

+crymian, +crymman (tr.) _to crumble_.

+crympan _to curl_.

crypel I. m. '_cripple_,' _LkL_. II. _crippled_. III. m. _narrow
passage, burrow, drain_, OEG; v. Mdf.

crypelgeat n. _narrow opening in a wall or fence_? BC 2·399^1.

crypelnes f. _paralysis_.

crýpeð, crýpð pres. 3 sg. of crêopan.

±cryppan _to crook (finger)_, _close (hand)_, _bend_.

cryps = cirps

crysm- = crism-

crýt = crýdeð pres. 3 sg. of crûdan.

cû f. gs. cû(e), cý, cûs; ds. cý; nap. cý, cýe; gp. cû(n)a, cýna; dp.
cûm; '_cow_,' _Æ, Lk, VPs_; Mdf.

cûbutere f. _butter_, #Lcd#. [cû]

cûbýre m. _cow-byre, cow-shed_, Ct.

cuc == cwic

cûcealf (æ) n. _calf_, _Erf, LL_. ['_cowcalf_']

cuceler, cuce(le)re = cucler(e)

cucelere '_capo_,' WW 380^25.

cucler, cuculer, cuclere m. _spoon, spoonful_. [cp. _L._ cochlear]

cuclerm¯æl n. _spoonful_, #Lcd#.

cucu (Æ, AO, CP) v. cwic.

cucurbite f. _gourd_, #Lcd# 92a. [_L._]

cudele f. _cuttlefish_, WW 181^7.

cudu (Æ) = cwudu

cûêage f. _eye of a cow_, LL 116#b#n.

cueðan = cweðan

cufel f. _'cowl,' hood_ (v. NED 2 p. viii).

cûfel = cýfl

cufle, cuffie = cufel

cugle, cug(e)le, cuhle f. _cap_, _'cowl,' hood, head-covering_, _RB_
(v. '_cowl_').

cûhorn m. _cow's horn_, LL 116.

cûhyrde m. _cowherd_.

cûle = cugle

culfer, cul(e)fre f. _'culver,' pigeon, dove_, _Gen, VPs, WW_.

culmille f. _small centaury_, #Lcd# 22a.

culpan as. of *culpa? m. or *culpe? f. _fault, sin_, #Cr# 177.

culpian _to humble oneself, cringe_, #Bo# 71^24.

culter m. '_coulter_,' _WW_: _dagger, knife_, _WW_. [_L._ culter]

culufre = culfre  [[under "culfer"]]

cûm v. cû.

cuma mf. _stranger, guest_, Æ, AO, CP. cumena hûs, inn, wîcung _inn,
guestchamber_.

cuman^4 _to 'come,' approach, get to, attain_, _Lk, VPs_; Æ, AO, CP.
c. ûp _land, be born_: (±) _go, depart_, Æ, AO: _come to oneself,
recover_: _become_: _happen_ (also c. forð): _put_: (+)_come together,
arrive, assemble_, Æ: (¶) w. inf. of verbs of motion, forming a sort of
periphrastic conjugation for such verbs. côm gangan _he came_. côm
swimman _he swam_, _etc._

cumb I. m. _valley_, _BC_; Mdf. ['_coomb_'] II. m. _liquid measure_,
_BC_. [v. '_comb_']

cumbelgehnâd = cumbolgehnâst  [[under "cumbolgebrec"]]

cumbl = (1) cumbol; (2) cumul

cumbol ¶ n. _sign, standard, banner_.

cumbolgebrec §, -gehnâst § n. _crash of banners, battle_.

cumbolhaga m. _compact rank, phalanx_, #Jul# 395.

cumbolhete m. _warlike hate_, #Jul# 637.

cumbolwîga ¶ m. _warrior_.

cumbor, cumbul == cumbol

cumen pp. of cuman.

cumendre f. _godmother_. [*cumædre A 37·52]

cûmeoluc f. _cow's milk_, #Lcd# 15a.

Cumere? -eras? np. _Cumbrians_, Æ.

cumfeorm f. _entertainment for travellers_, Ct. [cuma, feorm]

cû-micge f. -migoða m. _cow's urine_, #Lcd#.

cuml = cumbl

cumlîðe _hospitable_. [cuma]

cumlîðian _to be a guest_.

cumlîðnes f. _hospitality_, Æ: _sojourn as guest_.

cummâse f. _a kind of bird, 'parra,'_ WW 260^19.

cumpæder m. _godfather_, #Chr# 894#a#. [_L._ compater]

cumul, cuml n. _swelling_, #Lcd# 1·60.

cûna v. cû.

cund == cynd

-cund adjectival suffix denoting derivation, origin or likeness. (-kind)
as in deofol-cund, god-cund.

cuneglæsse f. _hound's tongue_, #Lcd# 41b. [_L._ cynoglossum]

cunele, cunelle, cunille f. _wild thyme_. [_Ger._ quendel]

cuning = cyning

±cunnan pres. 1 and 3 sg. can(n), pl. cunnon; pret. cûðe, pp. cûð swv.
_to be or become acquainted with, be thoroughly conversant with, know_,
_AO, B, Lcd_; CP, Æ: _know how to, have power to, be able to, can_, Æ,
CP: _express (thanks)_, _Chr_ 1092. ['_can_,' '_con_']

cunnere m. _tempter_, NG.

±cunnian (w. g. or a.) _to search into, try, test, seek for, explore,
investigate_, _B, Bo, Sol_; Æ, CP: _experience_: _have experience of, to
make trial of_. ['_cun_']

cunnung f. _knowledge_: _trial, probation, experience_.

cuopel f? _small boat_, _MtL_. ['_coble_']

cuppe f. '_cup_,' _Lcd, WW_; Æ.

curfon pret. pl. of ceorfan.

curmealle (e, i) f. _centaury_.

curnstân = cweornstân

curon pret. pl. of cêosan.

curs m. _malediction, 'curse,'_ _Ct, LL, Sc_.

cursian I. _to 'curse,'_ _Ps_. II. _to plait_? MkR 15^17.

cursumbor _incense_, MtL 2^11.

cursung f. _'cursing,' damnation_, _LkL_: _place of torment_, _MtL_.

cûs v. cû.

cûsc _chaste, modest, virtuous_, #Gen# 618. [_Ger._ keusch]

cûscote (eo, u) f. _'cushat' dove, wood-pigeon_, _Gl_.

cûself f. _cow's fat, suet_, GPH 392. [sealf]

cû-sloppe, -slyppe f. '_cowslip_,' _Lcd, WW_.

cûsnes = cîsnes

cûtægl m. _tail of a cow_, LL 169[59#b#].

cûð _known, plain, manifest, certain_, _Da, Ps, Rd_; Æ, AO, CP: _well
known, usual_: _noted, excellent, famous_, _Ex_: _intimate, familiar,
friendly, related_. ['_couth_']

cûða m. _acquaintance, relative_, CP.

cûðe I. _clearly, plainly_. ['_couth_'] II. pret. 3 sg. of cunnan.

cûðelic = cûðlic

cûðian _to become known_.

cûðice = cûðlîce

±cûðl¯æcan _to make known_: _make friends with_, ÆL.

cûðlic _known, certain, evident_. adv. -lîce _clearly, evidently,
certainly, openly_, _BH_; CP, Æ: _familiarly, kindly, affably_, _An,
BH_; Æ: _therefore, to be sure, hence_.

cûðnes f. _acquaintance, knowledge_.

cûðnoma m. _surname_, NG.

cûðon pret. pl. of cunnan.

cûwearm _warm from the cow (milk)_, #Lcd# 126a.

cuwon pret. pl. of cêowan.

cwacian _to 'quake,' tremble, chatter (of teeth)_, _Æ, AO, Cr, LkL,
VPs_.

cwacung f. _'quaking,' trembling_, _Æ, VPs_; AO.

cwæc- = cwac-

cw¯ædon pret. pl. of cweðan.

cwæl pret. 3 sg., cw¯ælon pret. pl., of cwelan.

cwæl- = cwal-, cwiel-, cwil-

cw¯æman = cwêman

cw¯æn = cwên

cwærtern = cweartern

cwæð pret. 3 sg. of cweðan.

cwal- = cweal-

cwalstôw (LL 556[10,2]) = cwealmstôw

cwalu f. _killing, murder, violent death, destruction_, Æ, CP. [cwelan]

cwânian ¶ (tr. and intr.) _to lament, bewail, deplore, mourn_. [_Goth._
kwainon]

cwânig _sad, sorrowful_, #El# 377.

cwânung f. _lamentation_, NC 279.

cwartern = cweartern

cwatern _the number four at dice_, #Gl#. [_L._]

cwêad n. _dung, dirt, filth_. [_Ger._ kot]

cweaht pp. of cweccan.

cweald pp. of cwellan.

cwealm (e) mn. _death, murder, slaughter_: _torment, pain_: _plague,
pestilence_, _ÆH_; AO. ['_qualm_'; cwelan]

+cwealmb¯æran _to torture_.

cwealmb¯ære _deadly, murderous, bloodthirsty_, Æ.

cwealmb¯ærnes (e) f. _mortality, destruction, ruin_, Æ.

cwealmbealu n. _death_, B 1940.

cwealmberendlic (y^1) _pestilent, deadly_, NC 279.

cwealmcuma m. _death-bringer_, B 792.

cwealmdrêor m. _blood shed in death_, #Gen# 985.

+cwealmful (y^1) _pernicious_, #HGl# 428.

cwealmnes f. _pain, torment_, BH.

cwealmstede m. _death-place_.

cwealmstôw f. _place of execution_, BH 38^6 (#b#).

cwealmðrêa m. _deadly terror_, #Gen# 2507.

cwearn = cweornstân

cweartern (a, æ, e) n. _prison_, Æ.

cwearternlic _of a prison_.

±cweccan _to shake, swing, move, vibrate_, _Mt, VPs_; Æ. ['_quetch_';
cwacian]

cweccung f. _moving, shaking, wagging_.

cwecesand m. _quicksand_, WW 357^6.

+cwed n. _declaration_, WW 423^22.

cweddian = cwiddian

cwedel = cwedol

cweden pp. of cweðan.

+cwedfæsten f. _appointed fast_, A 11·99; ES 43·162.

+cwednes f. _name_, #HGl# 441.

cwedol _talkative, eloquent_.

+cwedr¯æden (i, y) f. _agreement_, AO: _conspiracy_.

+cwedrædnes (y) f. _agreement, covenant_, NC 292.

+cwedstôw f. _appointed place, place of meeting_, GD 183^7.

cwehte pret. sg. of cweccan.

cwelan^4 _to die_, Æ, CP.

cweldeht _corrupted, mortified_, #Lcd# 47b. [= *cwildeht]

cwelder¯æde (æ^1)? _evening rider_? _bat_, #Shr# 29^8. [_ON._ kveld]

±cwellan _to kill, murder, execute_, _CP_; Æ, AO. ['_quell_']

cwellend m. _killer, slayer_, GPH 400.

cwellere m. _murderer, executioner_, _BH, Mk_; Æ. ['_queller_']

cwelm = cwealm (but v. MFH 106), cwielm-

cwelmere, cwelre = cwellere

±cwêman (w. d.) _to gratify, please, satisfy, propitiate_, _Æ, AO, CP_:
_comply with, be obedient to, serve_. ['_queme_'; '_i-queme_']

±cwême _pleasant, agreeable, acceptable_, _NG, WG_. ['_i-queme_']

cwême- = cwêm-

cwêmed- = cwêm-

±cwêming f. _pleasing, satisfaction, complaisance_, CP.

cwêmlic _pleasing, satisfying_, DR. adv. -lîce _graciously, kindly,
humbly_.

±cwêmnes f. _pleasure, satisfaction, mitigation_.

cwên (¯æ) f. _woman_, _Sc_; Æ: _wife, consort_, _AO, Chr, Gen_: _'queen,'
empress, royal princess_, _Æ, AO, Chr, Cr, VPs_. [_Goth._ kwêns]

cwene f. _woman_, _Rd, W_: _female serf_, _'quean,' prostitute_, AO.
[_Goth._ kwinô]

cwenfugol _hen-bird_.

cwênhirde m. _eunuch_, MtL 19^12.

cwênlic _womanly_? _queenly_? B 1940.

cweodu = cwudu

cweorn f. _'quern,' handmill, mill_, _MtL_; CP.

cweornbill _'lapidaria,' a stone chisel for dressing querns_ (BT), WW
438^18.

cweornburna m. _mill-stream_, Ct.

cweorne = cweorn

cweornstân m. _mill-stone_, _Mt_. ['_quernstone_']

cweorntêð mp. _molars, grinders_, #Gl#.

-cweorra v. mete-c.

-cweorran v. â-c.

cweorð _name of the rune for =cw= (=q=)_.

cwern (NG) == cweorn

cwertern = cweartern

±cweðan^6 _to say, speak, name, call, proclaim, summon, declare_, _Bl,
VPs_; Æ, AO, CP: (+) _order, give orders_: ± c. (tô) _agree, settle,
resolve_: (+) _consider, regard_, ÆL 1^117. c. on hwone _assign to one_.
cwyst ðû lâ _sayest thou?_ '_numquid_.' cweðe gê _think you?_
['_quethe_']

cwic [cuc, cucu (this last form is archaic, and has an occasional asm.
cucone, cucune)] _'quick,' living, alive_, _BH, Bl, Bo, CP, Lcd_; AO.

cwic¯æht f. _live stock_, LL 60[18,1].

cwicbêam m. _aspen, juniper_, _Gl, Lcd_. ['_quick-beam_']

cwicbeamen _of aspen_, #Lcd#.

cwicbêamrind f. _aspen bark_, #Lcd#.

cwiccliende _moving rapidly_? _tottering_? OEG 2234.

cwice fm. _'couch' ('quitch')-grass_, _Gl, Lcd_.

cwicfýr n. _sulphur_, LkR 17^29.

cwichrêrende _living and moving_, #Creat# 5.

±cwician _to quicken, create_, _JnL_: _come to life, come to one's
self_, _Æ, Lcd_. ['_quick_']

cwiclâc n. _a living sacrifice_, NG.

cwiclic _living, vital_, DR. adv. -lîce _vigorously_.

cwiclifigende ¶ _living_.

cwicrind = cwicbêamrind

cwicseolfor n. '_quicksilver_,' _Lcd_.

cwicsûsl nf. _hell torment, punishment, torture_, Æ.

cwicsûslen _purgatorial_, #ApT# 26.

cwictrêow n. _aspen_, WW.

cwicu == cwic

+cwicung f. _restoration to life_, GD 218^17.

cwicwelle _living (of water)_, JnR.

cwid- = cwed-, cwud-

cwidbôc f. _Book of Proverbs_, CP: _book of homilies_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

cwiddian (e, y) _to talk, speak, say, discuss, report_: _make a claim
against_, LL 400[3,1].

cwiddung (y) f. _speech, saying, report_, Æ.

cwide (y) m. _speech, saying, word, sentence, phrase, proverb, argument,
proposal, discourse, homily_, _Bo_; Æ, CP: _testament, will, enactment,
decree, decision, judgment_, _TC_; Æ. ['_quide_'; cweðan]

+cwide n. _sentence, decree, fate_.

cwidegiedd (i) n. _speech, song_, #Wa# 55.

cwidelêas _speechless_, Æ (y): _intestate_, EC 212.

cwielman (æ, e, i, y) _to torment, afflict, mortify, destroy, kill_,
_Bl, VPs_; AO, CP. ['_quelm_'] For compounds v. cwylm-.

cwiferlîce _zealously_, RB 122^2.

cwild (y) mfn. _destruction, death, pestilence, murrain_. [cwelan]

cwildb¯ære _deadly, dangerous, pestiferous_. adv. -b¯ærlîce.

cwildberendlic (y) _deadly_, NC 279.

cwildeflôd nm. _deluge_, #CPs# 28^10.

±cwildful (y) _deadly_, OEG.

cwildrôf _deadly, savage_, #Ex# 166.

cwilman = cwielman

cwilð pres. 3 sg. of cwelan.

-cwînan v. â-c.

-cwincan v. â-c.

cwine = cwene

+cwis _conspiracy_, OEG 4955.

-cwisse v. un-c.

cwist pres. 2 sg. of cweðan.

cwið I. (also cwiða) m. _belly, womb_. [_Goth._ kwiðus] II. pres. 3 sg.
of cweðan.

cwîðan _to bewail_: _accuse_, LL.

cwiðe = cwide

cwiðenlic _natural_, WW 412^30.

cwîðnes f. _complaint, lament_, GD.

cwiðst pres. 2 sg. of cweðan.

cwîðung (qu-) f. _complaint_, WW 488^37.

cwolen pp. of cwelan.

-cwolstan v. for-c.

cwôm pret. 3 sg. of cuman.

cwuc, cwucu = cwic

cwudu (eo, i) n. _what is chewed, cud_, Æ: _resin of trees_. hwît c.
_chewing gum, mastic_.

cwyc == cwic

cwyd- = cwed-, cwid-, cwidd-

cwydele f. _pustule, tumour, boil_.

cwyld == cwild

cwyldseten f. _first hours of night_, #Gl#.

cwyldtîd m. _evening_, WW. [_ON._ kveld]

cwylla m. _well, spring_, KC 2·265^30. [_Ger._ quelle]

cwylm = cwealm

cwylm- = cwielm-

  [[Printed on one line:
  cwylm = cwealm, cwielm-]]

cwylmend m. _tormentor, destroyer_, GD.

cwylmende _excruciating, deadly_.

+cwylmful _pernicious_, #HGl# 428.

cwylmian (intr.) _to suffer_: (tr.) _torment, kill, crucify_, Æ.
[cwealm]

cwylming f. _suffering, tribulation_, Æ: (metaph.) _cross_: _death_.

cwylmnes f. _pain, torment_.

cwylseten = cwyldseten

cwyltîd = cwyldtîd

cwylð pres. 3 sg. of cwelan.

cwyne = cwene

cwyrn == cweorn

±cwýsan _to squeeze, dash against, bruise_, Æ.

cwyst pres. 2 sg. of cweðan.

cwyð pres. 3 sg. of cweðan.

cwýðan = cwîðan

cwyðe = cwide

cwyðst pres. 2 sg. of cweðan.

cý v. cû.

cycel (i) m. _small cake_, #Gl#.

cycen = cicen

cycene f. '_kitchen_,' _Æ, WW_. [_L._ coquina]

cycenðênung f. _service in the kitchen_, NC 279.

cycgel m. '_cudgel_,' _BDS, CP_.

cýdde pret. 3 sg. of cýðan.

cýdung = cîdung

cýe I. v. cû. II. = cêo

cýf f. _tub, vat, cask, bushel_, _Æ_. ['_keeve_']

cyfes == ciefes

cýfl m. _tub, bucket_.

cýgan = cîegan

cýgling = cýðling

+cygd = +cîd

+cýgednes = +cîgednes

cylcan '_ructare_,' OEG 20^2.

cyld = (1) cild; (2) ceald

cyldfaru f. _carrying of children_, Æ.

cyle == ciele

cylen f. _'kiln,' oven_, _Cp, WW_.

cyleðenie = celeðonie

cylew = cylu

cylin = cylen

cyll f. _skin, leather bottle, flagon, vessel, censer_, Æ, AO, CP.

cylle I. mf. = cyll. II. = cielle

cyllfylling f. _act of filling a bottle_, GD 250^27.

cyln = cylen

cylu _spotted, speckled_, WW 163^29.

cym imperat. of cuman.

cymbala = cimbala  [[under "cimbal"]]

cyme (i) m. _coming, arrival, advent, approach_, _Bo, MtR_; AO, CP.
['_come_']

cýme (î) _comely, lovely, glorious, splendid_.

cymed n. _germander_, #Lcd#.

cymen I. mn. '_cumin_,' _CP, Mt_. [_L._] II. pp. of cuman. III. (and
cymin) = cinimin

  [[Referenced word could not be identified.]]

cýmlic ¶ _'comely,' lovely, splendid_, _Ps_. adv. -lîce, _B_.

cýmnes f. _fastidiousness, daintiness_, #Gl#.

cymst pres. 2 sg., cym(e)ð pres. 3 sg. of cuman.

cyn = (1) cynn; (2) cinn

cýna gp. of cû.

cyncan as. of sb. _small bundle, bunch_? (BT) #Lcd# 2·58^22.

±cynd (usu.+) nf. _nature, 'kind,' ('i-cunde') property, quality_, _Bl,
Gu, Met_: _character_, _Bo_: _gender_, _Ph_: (+) _race, species_, _Bl,
Bo, El_: (+) _origin, generation, birth_, +_Hy_: (+) _offspring_: (+)
'_genitalia_,' Æ.

+cyndbôc f. _book of Genesis_.

+cynde _natural, native, innate_, _B, Bo, WW_; Æ, AO, CP: _proper,
fitting_, _Met_: _lawful, rightful_, _Chr, Met_. ['_kind_,' '_i-cunde_']

cyndelic _'kindly,' natural, innate_, _Bo, Lcd_: _generative, of
generation_, LL 7[64]: _proper, suitable_, _Bo_: _lawful_, _BH_. adv.
-lîce, _Bo_.

+cyndlim n. _womb_: pl. '_genitalia_.'

+cyndnes f. _nation_: _produce, increase_, RHy 6^22.

+cynd-o, -u f. = cynd

cyne = cine II.

cýne = cêne

cynebænd m. _diadem_, NC 279.

cynebeald ¶ _royally bold, very brave_.

cynebearn (a^3) n. _royal child, Christ_.

cyneboren _royally born_, Æ.

cynebôt f. _king's compensation_, LL.

cynebotl n. _palace_, Æ.

cynecynn n. _royal race, pedigree or family_, Æ, AO.

cynedôm (cyning-, _Da_) m. _royal dignity, kingly rule, government_,
_Chr, Gl_; AO: _royal ordinance or law_: _'kingdom' ('kindom'), royal
possessions_.

cyneg = cyning

cyne-geard, -gerd = cynegyrd

cynegew¯ædu np. _royal robes_, BH 32^25.

cynegierela m. _royal robe_, #Met# 25^23 (e^3).

cynegild n. _king's compensation_, LL 462.

cynegôd ¶ _noble, well-born, excellent_.

cynegold ¶ n. _regal gold, crown_.

cyne-gyrd, -ge(a)rd f. _sceptre_, Æ.

cynehâd m. _kingly honour, state, or dignity_, CP.

cynehâm m. _royal manor_, EC.

cyne-helm, -healm m. _diadem, royal crown_, Æ: _royal power_.

cynehelmian _to crown_, ZDA 20·37.

cynehlâford m. _liege lord, king_.

cynehof n. _king's palace_, GPH 391.

cynelic I. _kingly, royal_, CP: _public_. adv. -lîce. II. = cynlic

cynelicnes f. _kingliness_, BH 194^34.

cynemann m. _royal personage_, NG.

cyneren = cynren

cynerîce (cyning-) n. _rule, sovereignty_, _Chr, Ct_; CP: _region,
nation_, AO. ['_kinrick_,' '_kingrick_']

cyneriht n. _royal prerogative_, EC 202^18.

cynerôf ¶ _noble, renowned_.

cynescipe m. _royalty, majesty, kingly power_, Æ.

cynesetl n. _throne, capital city_, AO.

cynestôl m. _throne, royal dwelling, city_, Æ, AO, CP.

cynestr¯æt f. _public road_, WW 71^6.

cyneðrymlic _very glorious_, NC 279.

cyneðrymm ¶ m. _royal glory, majesty, power_: _kingly host_, #Da# 706.

cynewâðen [-wâden?] _of royal purple_, TC 538.

cynewîse f. _state, commonwealth_.

cynewiððe f. _royal diadem_, #Gl#.

cyneword n. _fitting word_, #Rd# 44^16. [cynn]

cynewyrðe _noble, kingly_, A 8·308, MF 157.

cyng, cynig == cyning

cyning m. _'king,' ruler_, _Bo, Bl, Chr_; Æ, AO, CP: _God, Christ_, _Bl,
OET_: (¶) _Satan_.

cyning- = cyne-

cyning¯æðe _man entitled to take oath as a king's thane_, LL 112[54#bh#].

cyninge f. _queen_, #Bl# 13^1.

cyningeswyrt f. _marjoram_, WW 301^17.

cyningfeorm f. _king's sustenance, provision for the king's household_.

cyninggenîðla m. _great feud_, #El# 610.

cyninggereordu np. _royal banquet_, WW 411^28.

cynlic _fitting, proper, convenient, becoming, sufficient_. adv. -lîce.

cynn I. (i) n. _kind, sort, rank, quality_: _family, generation,
offspring, pedigree, kin, race, people_, _Æ, Bl, CP, Chr_: _gender,
sex_, _Æ, Lcd_: _propriety, etiquette_. II. adj. _becoming, proper,
suitable_, CP.

+cynn = +cynd

cynn- = cenn-

cynnig _noble, of good family_, OEG.

cynnreccenes f. _genealogy_, NG.

cynren, cynrêd (#EPs#) n. _kindred, family, generation, posterity,
stock_, CP: _kind, species_.

cynresu _a generation_, Mt (pref.).

cynryn = cynren

cýo = cêo

cyp = cypp

cýp- = cîep-

cýpa m. I. (also cýpe) f. _vessel, basket_, _Lk, OEG_. ['_kipe_'] II.
(ê, î) m. _chapman, trader, merchant_, Æ.

±cýpan (î) _to traffic, buy, sell, barter_. [_Ger._ kaufen]

+cýpe adj. _for sale_, Æ.

cýpe- = cêap-, cîepe-

cýpedæg m. _market day_, OEG.

cýpend m. _one who sells, merchant_.

cypera m. _spawning salmon_, #Met# 19^12.

cyperen (Æ) = cypren

cypp = cipp

cypren _made of copper, copper_, AO. [copor]  [[under "coper"]]

cypresse f. _cypress_, #Lcd# 3·118^21. [_L._]

cypsan = cyspan

cyr- = cer-, cier-, cir-

cyre m. _choice, free will_, _Æ_. ['_cure_']

cyreâð m. _oath sworn by an accused man and by other chosen persons_.
v. LL 2·293.

cyrelîf n. _state of dependence on a lord whom a person has chosen_?:
_person in such a state_ (v. BT and NC 279).

cyren = (1) ceren, (2) cyrn  [[under "cyrin"]]

cyrf m. _cutting, cutting off_, _Æ_: _what is cut off_. ['_kerf_']

cyrfæt = cyrfet

cyrfel m. _little stake, peg_, WW 126^18.

cyrfet m. _gourd_. [_Ger._ kürbis]

cyrfð pres. 3 sg. of ceorfan.

cyrige v. wæl-c.

cyrin, cyrn (e) f. '_churn_,' _WW_.

cyrnel (i) mn. (nap. cyrnlu) _seed_, _'kernel,' pip_, _Æ, Lcd_:
_(enlarged) gland, swelling_, _Lcd_. [corn]

+cyrnod, +cyrnlod _granulated, rough_, OEG.

cyrps = cirps

cyrriol _the Kyrie Eleeson_, A 8·320.

cyrs- = cærs-, cris-

cyrstrêow n. _cherry-tree_, WW 138. [ciris; _L._]

+cyrtan _to shorten_.

cyrtel m. _(man's) tunic, coat_, Æ, AO: _(woman's) gown_, _Ct_.
['_kirtle_']

cyrten I. _fair, comely_, Æ: _intelligent_. adv. -lîce (and cyrtelîce)
_elegantly, neatly, fairly, well, exactly_. II. _ornament_? WW 216^7.

cyrtenes (e^1) f. _elegance, beauty_.

±cyrtenl¯æcan (e^1) _to beautify, make elegant_, Æ.

cyrð pres. 3 sg. of cyrran.  [[redirected to "cierran"]]

cys- = cyse-, ceos-

cýs- = cîs-

  [[Printed on one line:
  cys-, cýs- = cyse-, ceos-, cîs-]]

cýsefæt n. _cheese vat_, WW 379^27.

cýsehw¯æg n. _whey_, #Lcd# 119b.

cýsfæt (LL 455^17) = cýsefæt

cýsgerunn n. _rennet_.

cysirbêam = cirisbêam

cýslybb n. _rennet_, _Lcd_. ['_cheeselip_']

±cyspan _to fetter, bind_. [cosp]

±cyssan _to 'kiss,'_ _Æ, BH, Mt_. [coss]

cýssticce n. _piece of cheese_.

cyst I. fm. _free-will, choice, election_: (w. gp.) _the best of
anything, the choicest_, Æ: _picked host_: _moral excellence, virtue,
goodness_, CP, Æ: _generosity, munificence_, CP. [cêosan] II. = cist I.

cýst pres. 3 sg. of cêosan.

cystan _to spend, lay out, get the value of_, #Chr# 1124.

cystbêam = cistenbêam

cystel (= cist-) f. _chestnut-tree_.

cystelîce = cystiglîce  [[form of "cystig"]]

cystian (e) _to put in a coffin_, W. [cest]  [[under "cist"]]

cystig _charitable, liberal, generous_, _CP_; Æ: _virtuous, good_.
['_custi_'] adv. -lîce.

cystignes, cystines f. _liberality, bounty, goodness_, Æ: _abundance_.

cystlêas _worthless, bad_, #Gen# 1004.

cystlic = cystig

cystnes = cystignes

cýsð = cîesð pres. 3 sg. of cêosan.

cýswucu f. _the last week in which cheese was allowed to be eaten before
Lent_.

cýswyrhte f. _(female) cheese-maker_, LL 451[16].

cýta m. _'kite,' bittern_, _Cp_.

cýte (ê) f. _cottage, hut, cabin_, Æ: _cell, cubicle_, Æ.

cytel = citel

cytere = citere

cytwer m. _weir for catching fish_.

cýð = (1) cýðð, (2) cîð

±cýðan _to proclaim, utter, make known, show forth, tell, relate_, _Cp,
Cr, Jn_; CP: _prove, show, testify, confess_, _Mt, VPs_: _exercise,
perform, practise_, _B_: (+) _confirm_, LL: (+) _make celebrated_.
wundor c. _perform a miracle_. ['_kithe_'; cûð]

+cýðednes f. _testimony_, #LPs# 121^4.

cýðere m. _witness, martyr_, Æ.

cýðig _known_: (+) _knowing, aware of_, DR.

cýðing f. _statement, narration_, GD 86^14.

±cýðl¯æcan _to become known_.

cýðling = cýðing

±cýðnes f. _testimony_: _testament_ (often of Old and New Test.), Æ:
_knowledge, acquaintance_.

cýðð, cýððu f. _kinship, relationship_: _'kith,' kinsfolk,
fellow-countrymen, neighbours_, _Lk_: _acquaintance, friendship_: (±)
_native land, home_, _Bo_; AO, CP: _knowledge, familiarity_, _Æ, BH_.

cywes- = cyfes-

cýwð pres. 3 sg. of cêowan.

cýwung = cêowung




=D=


dâ f. _doe (female deer)_, Æ.

d¯æd I. (ê) f. (nap. d¯æda, d¯æde) _'deed,' action, transaction, event_,
_Æ, B, Bl, VPs_. II. = dêad

d¯ædbana m. _murderer_, LL 266[23].

d¯æd-bêta (Æ), -bêtere m. _a penitent_.

d¯ædbêtan _to atone for, make amends, be penitent, repent_, Æ. [d¯ædbôt]

d¯ædbêtnes f. _penitence_.

d¯ædbôt f. _amends, atonement, repentance, penitence_, _Mt_; AO.
['_deedbote_']

d¯ædbôtlihting f. _mitigation of penance_.

d¯ædbôtnes = d¯ædbêtnes

d¯ædcêne _bold in deed_, B 1645.

d¯ædfrom _energetic_, #PPs# 109^8.

d¯ædfruma ¶ m. _doer of deeds (good or bad)_, _worker_.

d¯ædhata m. _ravager_, B 275.

d¯ædhwæt ¶ _energetic, bold_.

d¯ædlata m. _sluggard_.

d¯ædlêan n. _recompense_, #Ex# 263.

d¯ædlic _active_, #ÆGr#.

d¯ædon = dydon pret. pl. of dôn.

d¯ædrôf ¶ _bold in deeds, valiant_.

d¯ædscûa (#Cr# 257) = dêaðscûa?

d¯ædweorc n. _mighty work_, #Ex# 575.

dæf- = daf-

±dæftan _to put in order, arrange_, Æ, CP.

+dæfte _mild, gentle, meek_, _Mt_. ['_daft_'; gedafen]

+dæftelîce, +dæftlîce _fitly, in moderation, in season_, CP.

dæg m. gs. dæges; nap. dagas _day, lifetime_, _Æ, Mt, Mk_; AO, CP.
andlangne d. _all day long_. dæges, _or_ on d. _by day_. tô d., tô dæge
_to-day_. d. ¯ær _the day before_. sume dæge _one day_. ofer midne d.
_afternoon_. on his dæge _in his time_. dæges and nihtes _by day and by
night_. lange on d. _far on, late in the day_. emnihtes d. _equinox_.
ealle dagas _always_, _Mt_: _Last Day_, _Bl_: _name of the rune for
=d=_.

dægcandel (o^2) ¶ f. _sun_.

dægcûð _open, clear as the day_.

d¯æge f. _(female) bread maker_.

dæge- = dæg-

dægehwelc _daily_.

dægenlic _of this day_.

dæges adv. v. dæg.

dæges-êage, -êge n. '_daisy_,' _Lcd, WW_.

+dægeð pres. 3 sg. _dares_? _braves_? W 220^28.

dægfæsten n. _a day's fast_.

dægfeorm f. _day's provision_, EC 226^2.

dæghluttre adv. _clearly, as day_, #Gu# 665.

dæghryne = dægryne

dæghwâm adv. _daily_.

dæghwâmlic _of day, daily_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ, AO.

dæghwîl f. (pl.) _days, lifetime_, B 2726.

dæghwonlîce = dæghwâmlîce

dæglang (o^2) _lasting a day_, #Sol# 501.

dæglanges adv. _during a day_, Æ.

dæglic = dæghwâmlic

dægm¯æl nm. _horologe, dial_.

dægm¯ælspîlu f. _gnomon of a dial_, WW 126^31.

dægmêlscêawere m. _horoscope-observer, astrologer_, WW.

dægmete m. _breakfast, dinner_, WW 267^13.

d¯ægol = dîgol

dæg-rêd (or ? dægred) (Æ, CP) -r¯æd n. _daybreak, dawn_, _Lk_.
['_dayred_']

dægrêdlêoma m. _light of dawn_, NC 280.

dægrêdlic _belonging to morning, early_.

dægrêdsang m. _matins_, RB, CM.

dægrêdwôma ¶ m. _dawn_.

dægrîm ¶ n. _number of days_.

dægrima m. _dawn, daybreak, morning_, _Æ_. ['_day-rim_']

dægryne _daily, of a day_, WW 224^29.

dægsang m. _daily service_, W 290^22.

dægsceald m? (_shield by day_?) _sun_, #Ex# 79.

dægsteorra m. _'daystar,' morning star_, _Æ, Lcd_.

dægsw¯æsendo np. _a day's food_, LL (220^30).

dægtîd f. _day-time, time, period_.

dægtîdum _by day, in the day-time_.

dægtîma m. _day-time, day_, #LPs# 120^6.

dægðerlic _of the day, of to-day, daily, present_, Æ.

dægðern f. _interval of a day_, #Lcd#.

dægðerne adj. _for use by day, every-day_, CM.

dægwæccan fp. _day-watches_, WW 110^24.

dægweard m. _day-watchman_, WW 110^25.

dægweorc n. _work of a day, fixed or stated service_, _Ex_: _day-time_.
['_daywork_']

dægweorðung f. _feast day_, #El# 1234.

dægwilla _wished for day_, #Gen# 2776.

dægwine n? _day's pay_, #Gl#.

dægwist f. _food, meal_, Æ.

dægwôma ¶ = dægrêdwôma

dæl I. nap. dalu n. _'dale,' valley, gorge, abyss_, _AO_. II. pret. 3
sg. of delan.

d¯æl (â) mn. (p. dæl-as, -e) _portion, part, share, lot_, _Cp, Bl, Gu_
(â), _VPs_; AO, CP: _division, separation_, _Æ_ (â): _quantity, amount_,
_Lcd_: _region, district_, AO. d. wintra _a good number of years_. be
d¯æle _in part, partly_. be healfum d¯æle _by half_. be ¯ænigum d¯æle _at
all, to any extent_. be ð¯æm d¯æle _to that extent_. cýðan be d¯æle _to
make a partial or '_ex parte_' statement_. sume d¯æle, be sumum d¯æle
_partly_: _part of speech, word_, #ÆGr#. ['_deal_']

±d¯ælan _to divide, part, separate, share_, _Da_; Æ, CP: _bestow,
distribute, dispense, spend, hand over to_, _An, Mk_: _take part in,
share with_, _Gen_: _be divided_. ¶hilde, earfoðe d¯ælan _to fight,
contend_. ['_deal_']

+d¯æledlîce _separately_.

d¯ælend m. _divider_, Lk 12^4.

d¯ælere m. _divider, distributor_, _WW_: _agent, negociator_, _Æ_:
_almsgiver_, Æ. ['_dealer_']

dæling f. _dividing, sharing_, #HGl# 423.

+d¯ælland = +dâlland

d¯ællêas _deficient, unskilled_: _destitute of, without_.

d¯ælm¯ælum adv. _by parts or pieces_, Æ.

d¯æl-neom-, -nym- = d¯ælnim-

d¯ælnes f. _sharing out_.

d¯ælnimend m. _sharer, participator_, Æ: _participle_, #ÆGr#. [_Ger._
teilnehmend]

d¯ælnimendnes f. _participation_, #BJPs# 121^2.

d¯ælnimung f. _participation, portion, share_.

d¯ælnumelnes = d¯ælnimendnes

d¯æm- = dêm-

dæn- = den-

d¯æp = dêop

dære v. daru.

dærne = dierne

dærst, dærste (e) f. _leaven_, NG, DR: (pl.) _dregs, refuse_, _Lcd_ (e),
_Ps_. ['_drast_']

+dærsted _leavened, fermented_, NG.

d¯æð = dêað

d¯æwig = dêawig

+dafen I. n. _what is fitting_, GD 84^6. II. _becoming, suitable, fit,
proper_.

+dafenian (often impers.) _to beseem, befit, be right_, Æ.

+dafenlic _fit, becoming, proper, suitable, right_. adv. -lîce.

dafenlîcnes f. _fit time, opportunity_.

+daflic = +dafenlic

dafn- = dafen-

+dafniendlic = +dafenlic

dâg m? (dâh) '_dough_,' _Lcd_: _mass of metal_.

dagas, dages v. dæg.

dagian _to dawn, be day_, _BH_; Æ. ['_daw_']

dagung f. _day-break, dawn_, BH. on dagunge _at daybreak_.

dâh = dâg

dâl = d¯æl

+dal n. _part_, GD 311^11.

dalc m. _bracelet, brooch_.

dalf (NG) = dealf pret. 3 sg. of delfan.

dalisc (? for *dedalisc) '_dedaleus_,' WW 221^3.

+dâlland n. _land under joint ownership, common land divided into
strips_. v. LL 2·443.

dâlm¯æd f. _meadow-land held in common and apportioned between the
holders_, KC 3·260^3.

dalmatice f. _dalmatic_ (vestment), ANS 84·13; GD 329^34.

dalu v. dæl.

darað, dareð = daroð

darian _to lurk, be hidden_, ÆL 23^322.

daroð ¶ m. _dart, spear, javelin_. daroða lâf _those left by spears,
survivors of a battle_.

daroðhæbbende _spear-bearing_, #Jul# 68.

daroðlâcende (eð) mp. _spear-warriors_.

daroðsceaft (deoreð-) m. _javelin-shaft_, #Gen# 1984.

daru f. gds. dære _injury, hurt, damage, calamity_, Æ.

datârum m. (indecl.) _date_.

dað _'bloma,' mass of metal_, WW 141^36.

Davîtic adj. _of David (psalms)_.

dêacon = dîacon

dêad (±) '_dead_,' _Æ, B, Mt_; AO, CP: _torpid, dull_. d. blôd
_congealed blood_.

dêad- = dêað-

dêadboren _still-born_, #Lcd# 1·206.

±dêadian _to die_, _JnL_. ['_dead_']

dêadlic _subject to death, mortal, perishable_, _Æ_: _causing death_,
_'deadly,' fatal_, _AO_: _about to die_. adv. -lîce.

dêadrægel n. _shroud_, WW 37^6. [hrægl]

dêadspring m. _ulcer_, #Lcd#.

dêadwylle _barren_, AO 26^16.

dêaf I. '_deaf_,' _Mt, Jul_; #VPs#: _empty, barren_, _CP_ 411^20. II.
pret. 3 sg. of dûfan.

-dêafian v. â-d.

dêaflic = dêfelic

dêafu f. _deafness_, #Lcd#.

deag = dæg

dêag I. _hue, tinge_, _Æ, WW_: '_dye_,' _WW_. II. pres. 3 sg. of dugan.

dêagan _to discolour, dye, colour_ (Earle); _to conceal oneself, hide_
(Leo). B 851.  [[from first edition]]

dêagel = dî(e)gol

dêaggede _gouty_, WW 161^31. [dêaw]

±dêagian _to 'dye,'_ _OEG_.

dêagol = dîegol

dêagol- = dîgol-

dêagung f. _'dying,' colouring_, _Æ_.

dêagwyrmede _gouty_, WW 161^31. [dêaw]

dêah = dêag I. and II.

dêahl = dîgol

deal = deall

dealf pret. 3 sg. of delfan.

deall ¶ _proud, exulting, bold, renowned_.

dear pres. 3 sg. of *durran.

dearc = deorc

deareð = daroð

dearf I. pret. 3 sg. of deorfan. II. _bold_, NG.

dearflic _bold, presumptuous_, NG.

dearfscipe m. _boldness, presumption_, NG.

dearn-unga, -unge (e^2, i^2) _secretly, privately, insidiously_, Æ,
AO, CP.

dearoð = daroð

dearr pres. 3 sg. of *durran.

dearste (#VPs#) = dærste  [[under "dærst"]]

dêað (êo) m. _'death,' dying_, _An, Bo, Mt_; CP: _cause of death_, _Bl_:
in pl. _'manes,' ghosts_.

dêað- = dêad- (v. ES 39·324).

dêaðb¯ære _deadly_, CP.

dêaðb¯ærlic (dêad-) _deadly_.

dêaðbêacnigende _boding death_.

dêaðbêam m. _death-bringing tree_, #Gen# 638.

dêaðbedd ¶ n. _bed of death, grave_.

dêaðberende _fatal, deadly_, CP.

dêaðbêrnes f. _deadliness, destructiveness_, LkL 21^11.

dêaðcwalu ¶ f. _deadly throe, agony_: _death by violence_.

dêaðcwealm m. _death by violence_, B 1670.

dêaðcwylmende _killed_.

dêaðdæg ¶ m. _death-day_.

dêaðdenu ¶ f. _valley of death_.

dêaðdrepe m. _death-blow_, #Ex# 495.

dêaðf¯æge _doomed to death_, B 850.

dêaðfiren f. _deadly sin_, #Cr# 1207.

dêaðgedâl n. _separation of body and soul by death_, #Gu# 936.

dêaðgodas mp. _infernal deities_, WW 447^19.

+dêaðian _to kill_.

dêaðlêg m. _deadly flame_, #Gr# 983.

dêaðlic _'deathly,' mortal_, _Bl_: _deadly_: _dead_.

dêaðlicnes f. _mortality, mortal state_: _deadliness_.

dêaðmægen n. _deadly band_, #Gu# 867.

dêaðræced (= e^2) n. _sepulchre_, #Ph# 48.

dêaðr¯æs m. _sudden death_, #An# 997.

dêaðrêaf n. _clothing taken from the dead, spoils_, WW 397^22.

dêaðrêow _murderous, fierce_, #An# 1316.

dêað-scûa, -scufa m. _death-shadow, spirit of death, devil_.

dêaðscyld f. _crime worthy of death_, LL 130´.

dêaðscyldig (LL), dêadsynnig (NG) _condemned to death_.

dêaðsele ¶ m. _death-hall, hell_.

dêaðslege m. _death-stroke_, #Rd# 6^14.

dêaðspere n. _deadly spear_, #Rd# 4^53.

dêaðstede m. _place of death_, #Ex# 589.

dêaðsynnignes f. _guiltiness of death_, DR.

dêaððênung f. _exequies, last offices to the dead, funeral_.

dêaðwang m. _plain of death_, #An# 1005.

dêaðwêge n. _deadly cup_, #Gu# 964. [w¯æge]

dêaðwêrig _dead_, B 2125.

dêaðwîc n. _dwelling of death_, B 1275.

dêaðwyrd f. _fate, death_, WW 408^23.

dêaw mn. '_dew_,' _Æ, CP, VPs_.

+dêaw _dewy_.

dêawdrîas m. _fall of dew_? #Da# 277. [drêosan]

dêawig (¯æ, ê) '_dewy_,' _Ex_.

dêawigendlîc? _dewy_, #HGl# 408.

dêawigfeðera ¶ _dewy-feathered_.

dêawung f. _dew_, EHy 7^64.

dêawwyrm m. _'dew-worm,' ring-worm, tetter_, _Lcd_.

decan m. _one who has charge of ten monks_.

±dêcan _to smear, plaster_.

decanhâd m. _office of a_ 'decan.'

decanon = decan

Decembris m. _December_.

declînian _to decline_, #ÆGr#.

declînigendlic _subject to inflection_, #ÆGr#.

declînung f. _declension_, A 8·313^5.

dêd I. (A) = d¯æd. II. = dêad

dêde (#KGl#) = dyde pret. 3 sg. of dôn.

+dêfe (doefe once, in NG) _befitting, suitable, proper_: _meek, gentle,
kindly_. also adv.

+dêfelic _fit, becoming, proper_. adv. -lîce, BH.

defen- = dafen-

dêflic = dêfelic

+dêfnes f. _mildness, gentleness_, #LPs# 89^10.

+deftlîce = +dæftlîce  [[under "dæftelîce"]]

deg = dæg

dêg (NG) = dêag pres. 3 sg. of dugan.

dêg- = dêag-, dîeg-, dîg-

degn = ðegn

dehter ds. of dohtor.

dehtnung (#KGl#) = dihtnung

del = dæl

dela nap. of delu.

delan^4 _to fall, decay_? (Grein) _to be arrogant, proud, boastful_
(Leo). #Gen# 23.  [[from first edition]]

dêlan = d¯ælan

+delf n. _digging, excavation_, Æ, AO: _what is dug, trench, quarry,
canal_, Mdf.

delfan^3 _to 'delve,' dig, dig out, burrow_, _Æ, Bo, G_; AO: _bury_.

delfere m. _digger_, #Bo# 140^13.

delfîn _dolphin_, WW 293^13. [_L._]

delfîsen n. _spade_, WW.

delfung f. _digging_, WW 149^10.

+delgian = +telgian

dell nm. _dell, hollow, dale_, BH; Mdf.

delu f. _teat, nipple_, CP 405^1. [_OHG._ tili]

dem = demm

dêma m. _judge, ruler_, Æ, CP.

±dêman _to 'deem' ('i-deme'), consider, think, estimate, compute_, _Æ,
BH_: _judge, determine, decide, decree, sentence, condemn_, _BH, G, El_;
CP: _assign_: (¶) _praise, glorify_: (¶) _tell, declare_, _FAp_.

dêmedlic _that may be judged_, GD 336^20.

dêmend ¶ n. _judge, arbiter_.

dêmere m. _judge_, _MtL_ (oe). ['_deemer_']

demm m. _damage, injury, loss, misfortune_, AO, CP.

-demman v. for-d.

dêmon _demon, devil_, DR.

den = denn

dên = dôn pp. of dôn.

Denalagu, f. _the 'Dane law,' law for the part of England occupied by
the Danes_, _LL_.

den-b¯ære, -berende n. _swine-pasture_, Mdf.

dene = denu

Dene mp. _the 'Danes,'_ _Chr_; AO.

deneland (æ) _valley_.

Denemearc (æ^1, a^3, e^3) Denm-, f. _Denmark_.

dengan (ncg) _to beat, strike_, NC 281.

denge = dyncge

Denisc '_Danish_,' _Chr_. wk. nap. ðâ Deniscan _the Danes_.

denn n. _'den,' lair, cave_, Æ; _WW_: _swine-pasture_, v. Mdf.

dennian (æ) _to become slippery_? ¶#Chr# 937.

denstôw f. _place of pasture_, BC 3·144^21.

denu f. _valley, vale, dale_, _Æ, Lk, VPs_; Mdf. ['_dean_']

dêof = dêaf pret. 3 sg. of dûfan.

dêofel-, dêofl- = dêofol-

deofenian = dafenian

dêofol mn. gs. dêofles, nap. dêoflu, dêofol, _a 'devil,' demon, false
god_, _B, Mt, VPs_; AO: _the devil_, _CP, Jn, Jul_; Æ: _diabolical
person_, _JnLR_. [_L._ diabolus]

dêofolcræft m. _witchcraft_, AO.

dêofolcund _fiendish_, #Jud# 61.

dêofold¯æd f. _fiendish deed_, #Da# 18.

dêofol-gield (AO, CP), -gild, -geld (AO, VHy), -gyld (Æ) n.
_devil-worship, idolatry_: _idol, image of the devil_, Æ.

dêofolgielda (y^3) m. _devil-worshipper, idolater_, ÆH 1·70^23.

dêofolgieldhûs n. _idol temple_, AO 284^9.

dêofolgîtsung (dîwl-) f. _unrighteous mammon_, LkL 16^11.

dêofollic _devilish, diabolical, of the devil_, _Æ_. ['_devilly_'] adv.
-lîce.

dêofolscîn n. _evil spirit, demon_.

dêofolscîpe m. _idolatry_, NC 286.

dêofolsêoc _possessed by devils, lunatic_, Æ.

dêofolsêocnes f. _demoniacal possession_.

dêofolwîtga m. _wizard, magician_, #Da# 128.

dêoful == dêofol

dêog pret. 3 sg. of dêagan.

dêohl, dêogol = dîegol

±dêon (A) _to suck_, JAW 19.

dêop I. _'deep,' profound_, _Ps_: _awful, mysterious_, CP: (¶)
_heinous_, _Gu, Jul_: _serious, solemn, earnest_, _Ex_. d. cêap _high
price, great price_. II. n. _depth, abyss_, _Ex, Mt_: _the deep, sea_,
_Lk_.

dêope adv. _deeply, thoroughly, entirely, earnestly, solemnly_, _Ps_.

dêophycgende ¶ dêophýdig ¶ _deeply meditating, pensive_.

dêopian _to get deep_, #Lcd# 125b.

dêoplic _deep, profound, thorough, fundamental_, Æ, CP: _grievous_. adv.
-lîce '_deeply_,' _Bo, WW_.

dêopnes f. _depth, abyss_, _LPs, Nic_: _profundity, mystery, subtlety_,
Æ. ['_deepness_']

dêopðancol _contemplative, very thoughtful_, W 248^7; A 8·329. adv.
-lîce.

dêor I. n. _animal, beast_ (usu. wild), _Lk, Met, WW_; Æ, CP: _'deer,'
reindeer_, _AO_. II. _brave, bold_, _An, Sol_: _ferocious_, _B_:
_grievous, severe, violent_, _Da, Sol_. ['_dear_'] III. = dêore

dêoran = dýran  [[variant of "dýrsian"]]

dêorboren _of noble birth_, LL 104[34,1].

deorc _'dark,' obscure, gloomy_, _B, Ps_: _sad, cheerless_: _sinister,
wicked_, _Lk, Sat_. adv. deorce.

deorcegr¯æg _dark grey_, WW.

deorcful _dark, gloomy_, _Sc_. ['_darkfull_']

deorclîce _'darkly,' horribly, foully_, _GPH_ 391^22.

deorcnes f. '_darkness_,' _Sc_ 228^3.

deorcung f. _gloaming, twilight_, Æ.

dêorcynn n. _race of animals_, Æ.

dêore I. _'dear,' beloved_, _Jul_: _precious, costly, valuable_, _Bo_:
_noble, excellent_. II. adv. _dearly, at great cost_, _Met, WW_. III.
adv. _fiercely, cruelly_. [dêor II.]

dêoren _of a wild animal_.

deoreðsceaft = daroðsceaft

±deorf n. _labour_: _difficulty, hardship, trouble, danger_, Æ.

dêorfald m. _enclosure for wild beasts_, WW 201^34.

±deorfan^3 _to exert oneself, labour_, _Æ_: _be in peril, perish, be
wrecked_, AO. ['_derve_']

dêorfellen _made of hides_, WW 328^18.

+deorflêas _free from trouble_, #Gl#.

+deorfnes f. _trouble, tribulation_, #LPs# 45^2.

dêorfrið n. _preservation of game, deer-protection_, #Chr# 1086.

+deorfsum _troublesome, grievous_, #Chr# 1103; 1005 (y).

dêorgêat n. _gate for animals_, Ct.

dêorhege m. _deer-fence_, LL.

deorian (#Chr#) = derian

dêorlic _brave, renowned_, B 585.

dêorlîce _'dearly,' preciously, richly_, _El_: _sincerely, acceptably_,
AS 4^19.

dêorling (î, ý) m. _'darling,' favourite, minion_, _Æ, Bo, CP_:
_household god_.

dêormôd ¶ _courageous, bold_.

dêornett n. _hunting-net_, WW 183^12.

deornunga = dearnunga

deorsterlîce = dyrstelîce

dêortûn m. _park_, #Gl#.

dêor-wierðe (CP), -wurðe (Æ), -wyrðe _precious, dear, valuable, costly_,
_Bl, Bo_. ['_dearworth_']

dêorwyrðlic (eo^2, u^2) _precious, valuable_. adv. -lîce _splendidly_,
Æ: _as a thing of value_, Æ.

dêorwyrðnes (u^2) f. _treasure_.

dêoð (NG) = dêað

dêpan = dýpan

dêpe = dêop

deppan = dyppan

dêr = dêor

Dêra, Dêre mp. _Deirans, inhabitants of Deira_.

derian (w. d.) _to damage, injure, hurt_, _Bo_; Æ, AO, CP. ['_dere_']

deriendlic _injurious, mischievous, noxious, hurtful_, Æ.

dêrling (NG) = dêorling

derne = dierne

derne- = dyrne-

dernegelegerscipe (derneleger-) m. _adultery, fornication_, N.

derneleger _adulterous_, NG. adv. -ere _licentiously_, NG.

dernunga (NG) = dearnunga

derodine m. _scarlet dye_, CP 83^25.

derste (#VPs#) = dærste  [[under "dærst"]]

derung f. _injury_, GD.

desig = dysig

dêst v. dôn.

dêð I. 3 p. sg. pres. of dôn. II. _'manipulus,' sheaf_? _EPs_ 125^6.

+dêðian _to kill, mortify_, DR, NG.

dêðing f. _putting to death_, DR 72^13.

deððan? _to suck_, LkR.

dêwig = dêawig

dîacon m. _'deacon,' minister, levite_, _Æ, BH, Jn_.

dîacongegyrela m. _deacon's robe_, BH 90^2.

dîaconhâd m. _office of a deacon_, Æ.

dîaconrocc m. _dalmatic_, CM 723.

dîaconðênung f. _office of a deacon_, BH 272^17.

dîan (A) = dêon (A)

dîc mf. _'dike,' trench, ditch, moat_, _AO, BH, Chr_; Æ; Mdf: _an
earthwork with a trench_.

dîcere m. _digger_, Æ.

±dîcian _to make a dyke or bank_.

dîcsceard n. _breach of a dike_, LL 455[13].

dîcung f. _construction of a dike_, _WW_. ['_diking_']

dîcwalu f. _bank of a ditch_? KC 5·334^28.

dide, didon = dyde, dydon (v. dôn).

diegan _to die_, NR 38.

dîegel = dîegol

±dîegellîce (e, eo, i^1, o^2) _secretly_, AO, CP.

dîegelnes f. _privacy, secrecy, solitude_, CP: _hiding-place, recess_, Æ
(î): _secret, secret thought, mystery_, AO, CP; Æ (ý).

±dîeglan, -lian _to hide, cover, conceal, hide oneself_, CP.

dîegle = dîegol

dîegol (¯æ, ê, êa, êo, î, ý) I. adj. _secret, hidden, obscure, unknown,
deep_. [for compounds v. dîegel-.] II. adv. _secretly_. III. n.
_concealment, obscurity, secrecy, mystery_: _hidden place, grave_.

dîegolful (ê^1) _mysterious_, #Rd# 80^14.

dielf = dealf pret. 3 sg. of delfan.

dielgian = dilegian  [[headword spelled "dîlegian"]]

diend m. _suckling_, NG. [dêon]

dîere (ý) _'dear,' beloved_, _Lk_: _precious, costly_, _AO_: _noble,
excellent_.

±diernan (e, y) _to keep secret, hide, restrain, repress_, _AO_; Æ (y).
['_dern_']

dierne (æ, e, y) I. _hidden, secret, obscure, remote_, _B, El, Lk_; CP:
_deceitful, evil, magical_, _B, CP, Gen_. ['_dern_'] II. (y) n.
_secret_.

dierne- = derne-, dyrne-

dîerra comp. of dîere, dêore.

dîgan = dêagian

+dîgan (ê, ý) _to endure, survive, overcome_.

dîgel = dîegol (wk. dîgla, dîgle).

dîgel- = dîegel-

dîgl- = dîegl-

dîhl- = dîegel-

digner = dînor

dîgol, dîgul = dîegol

dîgol- = dîegel-

  [[Printed on one line:
  dîgol, dîgul, dîgol- = dîegol, dîegel-]]

dihnian = dihtnian

diht n. _arrangement, disposal, deliberation, purpose_, Æ:
_administration, office_: _direction, command, prescription_, Æ:
_conduct_, Æ: (+) _piece of writing, composition, literary work_.

±dihtan, dihtian _to arrange, dispose, appoint, direct, dictate,
impose_, Æ, G: _compose, write_, _Æ_. ['_dight_']

dihtere m. _informant, expositor_, _WW_: _steward_, Æ (= dihtnere): _one
who dictates_, _Guth_. ['_dighter_']

dihtfæstendæg m. _appointed fast_.

dihtig = dyhtig

dihtnere m. _manager, steward_, Æ.

dihtnian = dihtian  [[under "dihtan"]]

±diht-nung, -ung f. _ordering, disposition_.

dile m. _'dill,' anise_, _Gl, Mt, Lcd_; CP.

±dîlegian _to destroy, blot out_, _CP_. ['_dilghe_'; _Ger._ tilgen]

dilfð pres. 3 sg. of delfan.

dîlgian (CP) = dîlegian

dîlignes f. _annihilation, destruction_, #Gl#.

dill = dile

dim = dimm

dimhiw _of dark colour_.

dim-hof n., -hofe f. _place of concealment_, Æ.

dimhûs n. _prison_, OEG.

dimlic (y) _dim, obscure, secret, hidden_, Æ.

dimm _'dim' dark, gloomy, obscure_, _Bo, Gen, Sat_: _blurred, faint_,
_MH_: _wicked_: _wretched, grievous_.

dimmian _to be or become dim_.

dimnes (y) f. _'dimness,' darkness, obscurity, gloom_, _Lcd, VPs_; Æ:
_evil_: _obscuration, moral obliquity_, LL 476[14]: _a dark place_.

dimscûa m. _darkness, sin_? #An# 141.

dincge = dyncge

dîner = dînor

ding I. v. dung I. II. = dung II.

dingiung f. _manuring_, WW 104^8.

dinig? (A 8·450) = dung

dînor m. _a piece of money_, #ÆGr#. [_L._ denarius]

dîo- = dêo-, dîg-

dîowl- (NG) = dêofol-

dippan = dyppan

dirige _dirge, 'vigilia,'_ CM.

dîrling (CP) = dêorling

dirn- = diern-, dyrn-

dis- = dys-

disc m. _'dish,' plate, bowl_, _Gl, Mt_.

discberend m. _dish-bearer, seneschal_, WW.

discipul m. _'disciple,' scholar_, _BH, Mt_.

discipula _female disciple_, BH 236^34.

discipulhâd m. '_disciplehood_,' _BH_.

disc-ðegn, -ðên m. _dish-servant, waiter, seneschal, steward_, Æ.

disg, disig = dysig

dism (ðism) m. '_vapor_,' '_fumus_,' ES 41·324.

disma m., disme f? _musk_? _moss_? OEG 46^4 (A 30·123): '_cassia_,' #Ps#
44^9 (y).

distæf m. '_distaff_,' _WW_; Æ.

dîwl- = dêofol

dob- = dof-, dop-

dôc m. _bastard son_, WW.

docce f. _'dock,' sorrel_, _Lcd_.

docga m. '_dog_,' _GPH_.

dôcincel n. _bastard_.

dôefe v. +dêfe.

dôeg = dæg

dôema (NG) = dêma

dôere m. _doer, worker_, DR 198^6.

doeð- = dêað-

dofen pp. of dûfan.

dofian (dobian) _to be doting_, #Gl#.

dofung f. _stupidity, frenzy, madness_, #Gl#.

dôger = dôgor

dogga = docga

dogian _to endure_? #Rd# 1^9.

dôgor mn. (ds. dôgor and dôgore) _day_, AO, CP.

dôgor-gerîm, -rîm ¶ n. _series of days, time, allotted time of life_.

dôh = dâg

dohtar, dohter = dohtor

dohte pret. 3 sg. of dugan.

dohtig _competent, good, valiant, 'doughty,'_ _Chr_. [dugan]

dohtor f. gs. dohtor, ds. dohtor, dehter, nap. ±doh-tor, -tra, -tru
'_daughter_,' _Mt_; Æ, AO, CP: _female descendant_, _Jn_.

dohtorsunu m. _daughter's son, grandson_, #Chr# 982#c#.

dohx = dox

dol I. adj. _foolish, silly_, CP: _presumptuous_. [_Goth._ dwals; _Ger._
toll] II. n. _folly_, CP.

dolc = dalc

dolcswaðu = dolgswaðu  [[under "dolgswæð"]]

dolfen pp. of delfan.

dolg (dolh) nm. _wound, scar, cut, sore_: _boil, tumour_, Æ.

dolgbenn f. _wound_, #An# 1399.

dolgbôt f. _fine or compensation for wounding_, LL 62[23,2].

±dolgian _to wound_, #Rd#.

dolgilp m. _idle boasting_, B 509.

dolgrûne f. _pellitory_, #Lcd# 25a.

dolgsealf f. _poultice for a wound_, #Lcd#.

dolgslege ¶ m. _wounding blow_, #An#.

dolgswæð n., dolgswaðu f. _scar_, Æ.

dolh == dolg

dolhdrenc m. _drink for a wound, antidote_.

dolhsmeltas mp. _linen bandages_, WW 107^33.

dolhwund ¶ _wounded_.

dol-lic _audacious, rash, foolhardy, foolish_. adv. -lîce, CP.

dolmanus = dulmunus

dolsceaða m. _fell destroyer_, B 479.

dolscipe m. _folly, error_, CP 387^34.

dolsmeltas = dolhsmeltas

dolspr¯æc f. _silly talk_, CP 385^6.

dolwillen I. _rash, bold_, #Jul# 451. II. n. _rashness, madness_, #Jul#
202.

dolwîte n. _pain of a wound_? (BT), _punishment of the wicked, pains of
hell_? (Tupper), #Rd# 27^17.

dôm m. _'doom,' judgment, ordeal, sentence_, _BH, JnL_; Æ, CP: _decree,
law, ordinance, custom_, _Æ, VPs_: _justice, equity_, _VPs_: _opinion,
advice_: _choice, option, freewill_: _condition_: _authority, supremacy,
majesty, power, might_, _Jn_; AO: _reputation, dignity, glory, honour,
splendour_, AO: _court, tribunal, assembly_: _meaning, interpretation_.

-dôm masc. abstract suffix = _state, condition, power, etc._, as in
frêodôm.

dômærn n. _judgment-hall, tribunal_.

dômbôc f. _code of laws, statute-book, manual of justice_, _Æ, LL_.
['_doombook_']

dômdæg m. _'doomsday,' judgment-day_.

dômêadig ¶ _mighty, renowned_.

dômere m. _judge_, _Bo, LL_; CP. ['_doomer_']

dômern (Æ) = dômærn

dômfæst ¶ _just, renowned, mighty_.

dômfæstnes f. _righteous judgment_, #LPs# 100^1.

dômgeorn ¶ _ambitious_: _righteous_.

dômhûs n. _law-court, tribunal_, #Gl#.

dômhwæt adj. _eager for renown_? _strenuous in judgment_? #Cr# 428.

dômian _to glorify, magnify_.

dômisc adj. _of the day of judgment_.

dômlêas ¶ _inglorious, powerless_.

dômlic _famous, glorious, praiseworthy_: _judicial_, Æ: _canonical_, CM
268. adv. -lîce.

domne mf. _lord_, #Chr#: _nun, abbess_. [_L._]

dômsetl n. _judgment-seat, tribunal_, Æ.

dômsettend m. _jurisconsult_, WW 429^6.

dômstôw f. _tribunal_, W 148^31.

dômweorðung ¶ f. _honour, glory_.

±dôn anv. pres. ptc. dô(e)nde, pres. 2 sing. dêst, 3 dêð, pret. sg.
dyde, pl. dydon (æ, i), pp. dôn _to 'do' ('i-do') make, act, perform_,
_Gu, Met, Ps_; Æ, AO, CP: _cause_ (often followed by the inf. with a
passive sense or by ðæt), CP, #VPs#. hig dydon rîcu settan = _they
caused kingdoms to be founded_ (= _founded kingdoms_), AO: _put, place,
take (from or to)_, _CP, Mt, Ps_. d. ûp _put ashore_. +d. up _exhume_:
_give, bestow, confer_, _Ps_: _consider, esteem_: _observe, keep_: to
avoid repetition of another verb, _Æ, Gen, Mk_: (+) _arrive at_, #Chr#:
(+) _halt, encamp, cast anchor_, #Chr#: (+) _reduce_, #Chr#. d. tô
hîerran hâde _promote, advance to a higher position_. d. tô nâhte
_annul, make of none effect_. d. tô witanne _cause to know_. betre,
furðor d. _prefer_. +d. forð _manifest, show forth_.

dônlic _active_.

dop-ened, -ænid f. _diver, water-fowl, moorhen, coot_, #Gl#.

dopfugel m. _water-fowl, moorhen_, #Gl#.

-doppa v. dûfe-d.

-doppe v. fugol-d.  [[headword spelled "fugeldoppe"]]

doppettan _to plunge in, immerse_, Æ.

dor n. (nap. doru, dor) _door, gate_: _pass_, _Lcd, Ps_. [v. '_door_']

dora m. _humble-bee_, _Ep, Lcd, WW_; Æ. ['_dor_']

dorfen pp. of deorfan.

dorste (Æ, AO, CP) pret. 3 sg. of *durran.

dorweard m. _doorkeeper_, N.

dott m. _head of a boil_, _Lcd_. ['_dot_']

-dôung v. on-d.

dox _dark-haired, dusky_, #Gl#.

doxian _to turn dark_, ES 43·330.

draca m. _dragon, sea-monster_, _B, MH, Ps_: _serpent_, _Pa, Ps_: _the
devil_: _standard representing a dragon or serpent_, GPH 392.
['_drake_']

drâ-centse, -cente, -conze f. _dragon-wort_, #Lcd#. [_L._ dracontea]

dræce (N) = draca

dr¯ædan^7 _to dread, fear_.

dr¯æf I. f. _expulsion_. II. = drâf

±dr¯æfan _to drive, drive out_.

dr¯æfednes, dr¯æfnes f. _trouble, distress_. [= drêfednes]

dr¯æfend I. m. _hunter_, #Cra# 38. II. = drêfend

+dr¯æg = +drêag

dræge f. _drag net_, WW. [drâgan]  [[headword spelled "dragan"]]

drægeð pres. 3 sg. of dragan.

drægnett n. _drag-net_, _WW_.

dræhð, drægð pres. 3 sg. of dragan.

dr¯æn = drân

drænc = drinc

dræp pret. 3 sg. of drepan.

dræst = dærst

dræstig _full of dregs, rubbishy_, _WW_. [dærste; '_drasty_']
  [[under "dærst"]]

dr¯æt pres. 3 sg. of dr¯ædan.

drâf I. f. _action of driving_, _Bl_: _'drove,' herd_, Æ: _company,
band_, _W_; Æ. [drîfan] II. pret. 3 sg. of drîfan. III. = dr¯æf

dragan^6 _to drag, 'draw,'_ _JnL, CP_: _go_.

drâgense = drâcentse

drân (¯æ) f. '_drone_,' _WW_; Æ.

dranc pret. 3 sg. of drincan.

drapa = dropa

drêa = drý

drêag, drêah pret. 3 sg. of drêogan.

+drêag ¶ (¯æ) _apparition, vision_: _troop, crowd, rabble_:
_lamentation_.

drêahnian (ê) _to 'drain,' strain out_, _Lcd_.

dreaht pp. of dreccan.

drêam m. _joy, gladness, delight, ecstasy, mirth, rejoicing_, _Ct, Chr,
Sat_; AO: _melody, music, song_, _Æ_. ['_dream_']

drêamcræft m. _art of music_.

drêamere m. _musician_, #Bo# 38^7.

drêam-hæbbende §, -healdende § _happy, joyful_.

drêamlêas ¶ _joyless, sad_.

drêamlic _joyous, musical_, #Gl#.

drêamnes f. _singing_, #LPs# 136^3.

drêap pret. 3 sg. of drêopan.

drêap- (#VPs#) = drêop-

drêariend _inrushing tide_? WW 225^12.

drêarung = drêorung

drêas pret. 3 sg. of drêosan.

drec- = drecc-

±dreccan _to vex, irritate, torment, oppress, afflict_, _Æ, Gen, OET_.
['_dretch_']

±dreccednes (Æ), dreccung (_Sc_) f. _tribulation, affliction_.
['_dretching_']

drêd = dr¯æd pret. 3 sg. of dr¯ædan.

±drêfan _to stir up, excite, disturb, trouble, vex, afflict_, _B, Jn_;
Æ, CP. [drôf; '_dreve_']

+drêfedlic _oppressive_, AO 38^14.

±drêfednes f. _tribulation, trouble, scandal_.

drêfend (¯æ) m. _disturber_, RB.

dreflian _to 'drivel,'_ _WW_.

drêfre m. _disturber_, RB 121^12. [drôf]

drêfung f. _disturbance_, WW 109^2.

drêge = drýge

drêgan = drýgan

drêhnian (_Mt_) = drêahnian

dreht pp. of dreccan.

drêm- = drým-

drême = drýme

drenc m. _'drink,' drinking, draught_, _Æ, Lcd_; CP: _drowning_.
[drincan; '_drench_,' '_drunk_']

drencan _to give to drink, to ply with drink, make drunk_, _Ps_; CP:
_submerge, drown_, Æ. ['_drench_']

drenccuppe f. _drinking-cup_, WW 329^19.

drence- = drenc-, drinc-

drencflôd ¶ m. _flood, deluge_.

drenchorn m. _drinking-horn_, Ct.

drenchûs n. _drinking-house_, WW 186^25.

dreng m. _youth, warrior_, _Ma_ 149. ['_dreng_'; _ON._]

drêocræft = drýcræft

dreofon = drifon pret. pl. of drîfan.

+drêog I. n. _keeping (shoes) in good condition_, Æ: _usefulness_? RB
123^6. tô +d. gân _to ease oneself_, RB 32^22. II. _sober, gentle
(horse)_, GD 78^12.

±drêogan^2 _to lead a (certain) life, do, work, perform, fulfil, take
part in, conduct_, _Gu, Ps_; AO. wîde d. _wander_: _be busy, employed_:
_experience, suffer, endure, sustain, tolerate_, _Ex_; CP: _to enjoy_.
['_dree_,' '_i-dree_']

+drêogl¯æcan _to put in order, regulate, arrange, attend to_, Æ.

+drêoglîce (h) _discreetly, carefully_: _meekly, modestly, humbly_.

drêoh == drêog

±drêopan^2 _to drop_.

drêopian (êa) _to drop, drip, trickle_.

drêopung f. _dropping_, #VPs# (êa).

drêor ¶ m. _blood_. [drêosan]

dreord pret. 3 sg. of dr¯ædan.

drêorfâh _bespattered with gore_, B 485.

drêorgian = drêorigian

drêorig adj. ¶_bloody_, _blood-stained_, _B_: _cruel, grievous_, _Gu_:
_sad, sorrowful_: _headlong_? ['_dreary_'] adv. -lîce _sorrowfully_,
_Æ_. ['_drearily_']

drêorigferð _sorrowful_, #Cr# 1109.

drêorighlêor _sad of countenance_, #Wa# 83.

drêorigian _to be dreary, sad_, Æ.

drêorigmôd _sad in mind_, #Gen# 2804.

drêorignes f. _sadness, sorrow_, _GD_; Æ. ['_dreariness_']

drêorilic, drêorlic = drêorig

drêorsele m. _dreary hall_, #Wif# 50.

drêorung ¶ f. _falling, distilling, dropping_. [drêosan]

±drêosan^2 _to fall, perish_: _become weak, fail_.

drep = ðrep?

+drep m. _stroke, blow_, #An# 1446.

±drepan^5 _to strike, kill, overcome_, _B_. ['_drepe_']

drepe ¶ (y) m. _stroke, blow, violent death_.

+drettan _to consume_, #PPs# 70^12.

drî- = drý-

drif I. (±) f. _fever_, MkR 1^31; ANS 84·324. II. (+) _driving,
movement_: _what is driven, stubble_.

±drîfan^1 _to 'drive,' force, hunt, follow up, pursue_, Æ, AO, CP:
_drive away, expel_, _Mk_: _practise, carry on_, _RB_; Æ: _rush against,
impel, drive forwards or backwards_, _Cr, KC_: _undergo_.

drîgið, drîgð pres. 3 sg. of drêogan.

drîhð pres. 3 sg. of drêogan.

drîm = drêam

±drinc _'drink,' beverage_, _Bo, Chr, G_: _draught_, _Mt_: _drinking,
carousal_.

drinc- v. also drync-, drenc-.

drinca (m.), drince (f.) = drinc

+drinca m. _cup-bearer_, NC 293.

drincan^1 _to drink_, _Æ, Lk_; AO, CP. pp. druncen _refreshed, elate
(with drink)_, _drunk_.

+drincan _to swallow up, engulf_, Æ.

drincere m. _'drinker,' drunkard_, _MtL_.

drîorig = drêorig

drisn f? _false hair_? _hairy roots of plants_? (BT)

+drîtan^1 '_cacare_,' _Lcd_ 1·364^9. ['_drite_']

drîting f. '_egestio_' (sc. _ventris_), A 8·449.

±drôf _dirty, muddy, swampy, turbid, troubled_, _Lcd_. ['_drof_';
drêfan]

drôfe _grievously, severely_, #Lcd# 3·286^11.

+drôfednes = +drêfednes

drôfig _troubled_.

drôflic _troublesome, tormenting_.

drôg pret. 3 sg. of dragan.

droge f? _excrement_, #Lcd# 118b.

drogen pp. of drêogan.

drôgon pret. pl. of dragan.

drôh pret. 3 sg. of dragan.

drohnian = drohtnian  [[under "drohtian"]]

droht I. m? n? _condition of life_. II. (ô?) _pull, draught_, WW 486^27.

drohtað m. _mode of living, conduct_: _environment, society_:
_condition, employment, vocation_.

drohtian (CP), drohtnian (Æ) _to conduct oneself, behave, associate
with, lead a life, live, continue_. [drêogan]

droht(n)oð = drohtað

drohtnung = drohtung

  [[Printed on one line:
  droht-(n)oð, -nung = droht-að, -ung]]

drohtung f. _condition, way of life, reputation, conduct_, CP.

dronc = dranc pret. 3 sg. of drincan.

dropa m. _a 'drop,'_ _Az, Lk, VPs_; AO, CP: _gout_? _Lcd_: _humour,
choler_.

+dropa m. _a kind of date_, OEG 474.

dropen I. pp. of drêopan. II. (B 2891) = drepen pp. of drepan.

drop-fâg, -fâh I. _spotted, speckled_, #Lcd#. II. _starling_, #Gl#.

dropian _to 'drop,' drip, trickle_, _Ps_.

dropm¯ælum _drop by drop_, Æ.

droppetan, -ian _to drop, drip, distil_.

droppetung, drop(p)ung (_Ps_) f. _'dropping,' dripping, falling_, Æ.

droren pp. of drêosan.

+drorenlic _perishable_, NC 293.

drôs, drôsna (Æ) m., drôsne (#VPs#) f. _sediment, lees, dregs, dirt,
ear-wax_, _WW_. [drêosan; '_dross_']

drûgað = drûgoð

±drûgian _to dry up, wither_. [drýge]

drugon pret. pl. of drêogan.

drûgoð f., drûgoða m. _'drought,' dryness_, _WW_: _dry ground, desert_,
_LPs_. [drýge]

drûgung = drûgoð

druh m. _dust_? #Soul# 17.

druncen I. fn. _drunkenness_. II. pp. of drincan. III. adj. _'drunken,'
drunk_, _Sc_; AO.

druncenes = druncennes

druncengeorn _hankering after drink, drunken_.

druncenhâd m. _drunkenness_.

druncenig _drunken_, LkL 12^45.

druncenl¯æwe '_inebrians_,' #CPs# 22^5.

druncennes f. _'drunkenness,' intoxication_, _AO, Lk_; Æ.

druncenscipe m. _drunkenness_.

druncenwillen _drunken_, CP 401^29.

druncmennen n. _drunken maidservant_? #Rd# 13^1.

±druncnian _to be drunk_, Æ: _sink, drown_, _MtL_. ['_drunken_']

druncning f. _drinking_, #LPs# 22^5.

druncon pret. pl. of drincan.

drupian = dropian

drupon pret. pl. of drêopan.

druron pret. pl. of drêosan.

drûsian ¶ _to droop, become sluggish, stagnant, turbid_. [drêosan]

drût f. _beloved one_, DD 291.

drûw- = drûg-

drý m. _magician, sorcerer_, Æ, AO: _sorcery_. [_Celt._ drûi]

+drycned _afflicted_, AO 102^10.

drýcræft m. _witchcraft, magic, sorcery_, Æ: _magician's apparatus_.

drýcræftig _skilled in magic_.

drýcræftiga m. _sorcerer_, GD 27^15.

drýecge = drýicge

drýfan = (1) drîfan; (2) drêfan

drýg = drý

±drýgan (î) _to 'dry,' dry up, rub dry_, _Bo, Jn_; CP.

drýge (î) '_dry_,' _A, Bo, Mt_: _parched, withered_, _Lk_. on drýgum _on
dry land_. tô drýgum _to the dregs_.

drýgnes (î) f. _dryness_.

drýgscêod _dry-shod_, W 293^17.

drýhst pres. 2 sg. of drêogan.

dryht (i) ¶ f. (±)_multitude, army, company, body of retainers, nation,
people_, _Ex_: pl. _men_. ['_dright_'; drêogan]

+dryhta m. _comrade_.

dryhtbealo = dryhtenbealo  [[headword spelled "dryhtenbealu"]]

dryhtbearn n. _princely youth_, B 2035.

dryhtcwên f. _noble queen_, #Wid# 98.

dryhtdôm m. _noble judgment_, #VPs#.

dryht-ealdorman (NC), -ealdor (WW) m. _'paranymphus,' bridesman_.

dryhten (i) m. _ruler, king, lord, prince_, _Æ, B_: _the Lord, God,
Christ_, CP. ['_drightin_']

dryhtenbêag (drihtin-) m. _payment (to the king) for killing a
freeman_, LL.

dryhtenbealu ¶ n. _great misfortune_.

dryhtendôm? m. _rule, majesty, glory_, #An# 1001.

dryhtenhold (i) _loyal_, #Gen# 2282.

dryhtenlic _lordly_: _divine, of the Lord_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

dryhtenweard m. _lord, king_, #Da# 535.

dryhtfolc ¶ n. _people, troop_.

dryhtgesîð m. _retainer, warrior_, #Fin# 44.

dryhtgestrêon n. _princely treasure_, #Rd# 18^3.

dryhtguma m. ¶_warrior, retainer, follower, man_: _bridesman_.

dryhtin- = dryhten-

dryhtlêoð n. _national song, hymn_, #El# 342.

dryhtlic (i) _lordly, noble_, _B, Gen_. d. gebed _the Lord's Prayer_.
['_drightlike_']. adv. -lîce.

dryhtmann m. _bridesman_, #Gl#.

dryhtmâðm m. _princely treasure_, B 2483.

dryhtnê m. _warrior's corpse_, #Ex# 163.

dryhtscipe ¶ m. _lordship, rulership, dignity_: _virtue, valour, heroic
deeds_.

dryhtsele ¶ m. _princely hall_.

dryhtsibb ¶ f. _peace, high alliance_.

+dryhtu '_elementa_,' OEG.

dryhtwêmend, -wêmere (i) m. _bridesman_, OEG 1774.

dryhtweras ¶ mp. _men, chieftains_.

dryhtwuniende § _living among the people_.

dryhtwurð (i) _divine_, Æ.

dryhtwurða (i) m. _theologian_.

drýhð pres. 3 sg. of drêogan.

drýicge f. _witch_.

drýlic _magic, magical_.

drýman (ê; = î) _to sing aloud, rejoice_, _LPs_. ['_dream_']

drýmann m. _sorcerer, magician_, Æ.

±drýme (ê), +drýmed _melodious, harmonious, cheerful_.

drync m. _'drink' ('drunk'), potion, draught, drinking_, _Cp_.

drync- v. also drenc-, drinc-.

dryncehorn (i) _drinking-horn_.

dryncelêan (i) n. _scot-ale, the ale given by a seller to a buyer on
concluding a bargain_ (BT). v. LL 2·56.

dryncfæt (i) n. _drinking vessel_.

dryncgemet (i) n. _a measure of drink_, NC 287.

+dryncnes f. _immersion, baptism_, ÆL 23b, 723.

dryncwîrig _drunk_, WW 437^21.

±drýpan _to let drop, cause to fall in drops_, _Æ, AO_: _moisten_, Æ.
['_dripe_']

drype = drepe

dryre ¶ m. _ceasing, decline_: _fall, deposit_. [drêosan]

dryslic _terrible_, WW 191^28.

drysmian ¶ _to become obscure, gloomy_.

±drysnan _to extinguish_, NG. [drosn]  [[form of "drôs"?]]

+drysnian _to vanish, disappear_, LkL 24^31.

dubbian _to 'dub,' strike, knight (by striking with a sword)_, _Chr_
1085#e#.

dûce f. '_duck_,' _Ct_.

±dûfan^2 _to duck, 'dive,'_ _Rd_; Æ: _immerse_, _BH, Rd_: (+) _sink, be
drowned_, AO, CP.

dûfedoppa m. _pelican_, _LPs_. ['_divedap_']

dugan pres. 1, 3 dêag, dêah, pl. dugon, pret. dohte swv. (usu. impers.)
_to avail, be worth, be capable of, competent, or good for anything_,
_MtL_: _thrive, be strong_: _be good, virtuous kind_, _B, Sat_.
['_dow_']

dug-að, -eð, -oð = duguð

duguð fm. _body of noble retainers, people, men, nobles, the nobility_,
_Ex_; AO: _host, multitude, army_: _the heavenly host_: _strength,
power_: _excellence, worth_, _Hy_; Æ, AO: _magnificence, valour, glory,
majesty_: _assistance, gift_: _benefit, profit, wealth, prosperity,
salvation_, _Cr_: _what is fit, or seemly, decorum_. ['_douth_']

duguðealdor m. _chief man, president_.

duguðgifu (a^2, e^2) f. _munificence_, #Gl#.

duguðlic _authoritative, chief, noble_, OEG. adv. -lîce.

duguðmiht f. _supreme power_.

duguðn¯æmere m. '_municeps_,' OEG 7^12.

duhte = dohte (v. dugan).

dulfon pret. pl. of delfan.

dulhrune = dolgrune  [[headword spelled "dolgrûne"]]

dulmunus? m. _a kind of warship_, AO.

dumb _'dumb,' silent_, _An, Mt_; Æ, CP.

-dumbian v. â-d.

dumbnes f. _dumbness_, NC 282.

dun = dunn

dûn fm. nap. dûna, dûne _'down,' moor, height, hill, mountain_, _Bl,
Chr, Mt_; Æ; Mdf. of dûne _down, downwards_.

dûn-ælf, -elf, -ylf f. _mountain elf_.

dûne _down, downwards_. [dûn]

dûnelfen f. _mountain elf_, WW 189^9.

dûnestîgende _descending_, #VPs# 87^5.

dunfealu _dun-coloured_, WW.

dung I. f. ds. dyng, ding _prison_, #An# 1272. II. f. '_dung_,' _WW_.

dungr¯æg _dark, dusky_, WW 246^4. [dunn]

dunh- = dimh-

dûnhunig n. _honey from downland_, #Lcd# 132a.

duniendlic (dunond-) _falling down, tottering_, #LPs# 108^10 (BT).

dûnland n. _downland, open country_.

dûnlendisc _mountainous_.

dûnlic _of a mountain, mountain-dwelling_, WW 376^6.

dunn _'dun,' dingy brown, dark-coloured_, _Ct, WW_.

dunnian _to obscure, darken_, _Bo_. ['_dun_']

dunondlic v. duniendlic.

Dûns¯æte mp. _inhabitants of the mountains of Wales_, LL.

dûn-scræf ¶ n. nap. -scrafu _hill-cave_.

dure == duru

durfon pret. pl. of deorfan.

durhere (durere) m. _folding door_, #Gl#.

durran* (+ in NG) swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. dear(r), 2 dearst, pl. durron,
subj. durre, dyrre, pret. sg. dorste (u, y), pl. dorston _to 'dare,'
venture, presume_, _Æ, AO, BH, Bo, Met_.

durstodl n. _door-post_, WW.

duru (dure) f. gs. dura, ds. and nap. dura, duru _'door,' gate, wicket_,
_B, G_; CP, #Chr#.

duruhaldend (e^2) _doorkeeper_, JnL 18^17.

durustod (WW) = durstodl

duruðegn m. _doorkeeper_, #An# 1092.

duruðînen f. _female door-keeper_.

duruweard m. _doorkeeper_, _Æ, JnL_ (durweard). ['_doorward_']

dûst (û) n. '_dust_,' _Æ, Lcd_; AO, CP.

dûstdrenc m. _drink made from the pulverized seeds of herbs_, #Lcd#.

dûstig _dusty_, OEG 15; 3^9.

dûstscêawung f. _(viewing of dust), visit to a grave_, #Bl# 113^29.

dûstswerm m. _dust-like swarm_, OEG 23^52.

dûsð = dûst

dûðhamor m. _papyrus, sedge_, WW.

dwæl- = dwel-

+dw¯ærian = +ðw¯ærian

±dw¯æs I. _dull, foolish, stupid_. II. m. _clumsy impostor_, ÆL 23^696.

±dw¯æscan _to put out, extinguish, destroy_.

dw¯æsian _to become stupid_, HL.

dwæslic _foolish_. adv. -lîce.

+dw¯æsmann m. _fool_, ÆL 17^101.

dw¯æsnes f. _stupidity, foolishness_, Æ.

dwal- = dwol-

dwân pret. 3 sg. of dwînan.

dwealde pret. 3 sg. of dwellan.

dwel- = dwol-

dwelian _to lead astray, deceive_, Æ.

dwellan pret. sg. dwealde, pp. dweald _to lead astray, hinder, prevent,
deceive_, _Bo, Rd_; Æ: _to be led astray, wander, err_, _Æ, Mt_.
['_dwele_,' '_dwell_']

dwelsian _to wander_, #LPs# 118^110.

+dweola, +dweolsa = +dwola

dweoligan = dwellan

dweorg (e, i) m. '_dwarf_,' _Gl_. [_Ger._ zwerg]

dweorge-dwosle, -d(w)os(t)le f. _pennyroyal, flea-bane_, #Gl, Lcd#.

dweorh = dweorg

±dwild (y) n. _error, heresy_, _Chr_. ['_dwild_']

+dwildæfterfolgung (dwel-) f. _heresy_, A 8·450; 13·318.

+dwildlic (y) _deceptive_? W 196^20.

±dwi-mor (-mer) n. _phantom, ghost, illusion_, Æ.

+dwimorlic _illusory, unreal_. adv. -lîce. Æ.

dwînan^1 _to waste away, languish, disappear_, _Lcd, WW_. ['_dwine_']

+dwol _heretical_.

±dwola m. _error, heresy_, _BH, MtLR_: _madman, deceiver, heretic_, _Æ,
Bl_: '_nenia_,' MtL p. 8^9. ['_dwale_']

+dwolbiscop m. _heretical bishop_.

±dwolcræft m. _occult art, magic_.

dwolema = dwolma

+dwolen ¶ _perverse, wrong, erroneous_.

+dwolfær n. _a going astray_, RHy 6^36.

+dwolgod m. _false god, idol, image_, W 106^30.

±dwolian _to be led astray, err, wander_, _BH_; CP. ['_dwele_']

dwollic _foolish_: _erroneous, heretical_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

±dwolma m. _chaos_.

±dwolman m. _heretic_, Æ, AO, CP.

+dwolmist m. _mist of error_.

+dwolspr¯æc f. _heretical talk_.

+dwolsum _misleading, erroneous_, Æ.

dwolðing n. _imposture, idol_.

dwolung f. _foolishness, insanity_, WW 390^31.

dwomer = dwimor

dworgedwostle = dweorgedwosle

dwyld = dwild

dwylman v. fordwilman.

dwy-mer, -mor == dwimor

dwyrgedwysle = dweorgedwosle

dybbian _to pay attention to_, OEG 645.

dýdan (= î) _to kill_, LL. [dêad]

dyde pret. 3 sg., dydon pret. pl. of dôn.

dyder- = dydr-

dydrian _to deceive, delude_.

dydrin m? _yolk_, #Lcd#. [_Ger._ dotter]

dydrung (= i) f. _delusion, illusion_, Æ.

dýfan (= î) _to dip, immerse_.

dýfing f. _immersion_, W 36^9.

dýfst pres. 2 sg. of dûfan.

dýgel-, dýgl-, dýhl- = dîegol-, dîeg(o)l-

dyht = diht

dyhtan = dihtan

dyhtig (o) _'doughty,' strong_, _B, Gen_. [dugan]

dyle = dile

+dylegian = +dilegian  [[headword spelled "dîlegian"]]

dylsta m. _festering matter, filth, mucus_, #Lcd#.

dylstiht _mucous_, #Lcd# 26a.

dym- = dim-

dyn- = din-

±dyn = dyne

dyncge f. _dung, manure, litter_: _manured land, fallow land_, OEG.
[dung]

dyne m. _'din,' noise_, _Sat, Sol_.

+dyngan (AO), dyngian (_WW_) _to 'dung.'_

dynian _to make a 'din,' sound, resound_, _B_; Æ: _stream_? ANS 118·385.

dýnige f. _a plant_, #Lcd# 113b. [dûn]

dynn = dyne

dynnan = dynian

dynt m. _'dint,' blow, stroke, bruise, stripe_, _JnL_; CP: _thud_.

dýp = dêop

dýpan I. _to 'dip'_: _baptize_, _MtR_ (ê): (+) _anoint_, #EPs# 140^5.
II. _to make greater_, LL.

dýpe = dêop

dyple _double_, A 8·334^10.

dyppan (e, i) _to 'dip,' immerse_, _Lcd, Mk_: _baptize_, _MtR_.

dyr == dêor

dyre ds. of duru.

dýre adj. = dîere

+dyre n. _door-post_, Æ.

±dyrfan _to afflict, injure_; _imperil, endanger_. v. ES 39·342.
[deorfan]

dyrfing f? '_actio_,' GPH 395.

dyrfð pres. 3 sg. of deorfan.

dyrn- = diern-, dern-

dyrneforlegen _adulterous_, LL (144^19).

dyrnegeligre I. (ie, e) n. _adultery_, AO, CP. II. m. _fornicator_, DR
107^1.

dyrngewrit n. _apocryphal book_, WW 347^38.

dyrnh¯æmende (i) _fornicating, adulterous_, WW 383^40.

dyrnlîce _secretly_, #Lcd# 3·424^30.

dyrnlicgan^5 _to fornicate_.

dyrnmaga m. _president at mysteries_, GPH 397.

dyrnunga = dearnunga

dyrodine = derodine

dýrra = dîerra

dyrre v. *durran.

+dýrsian _to praise, glorify, hold dear, prize_, #Jud# 300. [dîere]

+dyrst f. _tribulation_, #Hell# 108.

dyrste = dorste pret. 3 sg. of *durran.

+dyrstelîce = dyrstiglîce  [[form of "dyrstig"]]

±dyrstig _venturesome, presumptuous, daring, bold_, CP. adv. -lîce.
[*durran]

+dyrstigian _to dare, presume_, BH 468^19.

±dyrstignes f. _boldness, insolence, daring, presumption, arrogance,
rashness_, Æ, CP.

dyrstingpanne = hyrstingpanne
  [[redirected to "hierstingpanne" under "hierste"]]

±dyrstl¯æcan _to presume, dare_, Æ.

+dyrstl¯æcung f. _courage, boldness_, GD 71^19.

dyrstnes = dyrstignes

dyru ds., dyrum dp. of duru.

dýr-wurðe, -wyrðe = dêorwierðe

dys- = dis-

dyseg = dysig

dyseg- = dysg-

  [[Printed on one line:
  dyseg == dysig, dysg-]]

dyselic (Æ) = dyslic

dysgian _to act foolishly, make mistakes_, _Bo_; Æ: _blaspheme_, _G_.
['_dizzy_']

dysgung f. _folly, madness_, #Lcd# 53b.

dysian = dysgian

dysig (e, i) I. _foolish, ignorant, stupid_, _Bl, Mt_; Æ, CP.
['_dizzy_'] II. n. _foolishness, error_, AO, CP. III. m. _fool_, _VPs_
91^6.

dysigan = dysgian

dysigdôm m. _folly, ignorance_.

dysignes f. _folly, madness, blasphemy_, _BH_; Æ, AO. ['_dizziness_']

dysigu = dysig II.

dyslic _foolish, silly, stupid_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce.

dýstig _dusty_, WW 517^23. [dûst]

dyttan _to shut to, close, stop_.

dýð f. _fuel, tinder_, OEG 2^43; cp. 1655n.

dýð-homar, -homer = dûðhamor




=E=


ê ds. of êa.

êa I. f. (usu. indecl. in sg., but with occl. gs. êas; ds. îe, ê, ¯æ, êæ;
nap. êa, êan; gp. êa; dp. êa(u)m, êan) _water, stream, river_, _Chr,
Ps_; Æ, AO. ['_ea_'; _Goth._ ahwa] II. interj. v. êalâ.

êac I. adv. _also, and, likewise, moreover_, Æ, AO, CP. ge...ge êac
_both...and also_. nê...nê êac... _neither...nor even..._ êac swâ, êac
swilce _also, likewise, moreover, as if_. êac gelîce _likewise_. êac
hwæðre _however, nevertheless_. êac ðon _besides_. II. prep. w. d.
_together with, in addition to, besides_. [_Ger._ auch]

êaca m. _addition, increase, reinforcement, advantage, profit, usury,
excess_, _Chr_; Æ, AO, CP. tô êacan (w. d.) _in addition to, besides,
moreover_, _Bo_. ['_eke_']

êacan = îecan

êacen _increased, augmented_: _richly endowed, strong, great, vast,
vigorous_: _pregnant_.

êacencræftig _huge_, B 2280.

êacerse f. _water-cress_, #Lcd# 35b. [êa]

êacian _to increase_, CP.

±êacnian _to add, increase, be enlarged_: _become pregnant, conceive,
bring forth_, Æ, CP.

êacniendlic adj. _to be increased_, OEG 1078.

±êacnung f. _increase_, #Gl#: _conception, bringing forth_, Æ.

êad ¶ n. _riches, prosperity, good fortune, happiness_.

ead- = ed-

êaden ¶ (pp. of *êadan) _granted_.

eadesa = adesa

êadfruma ¶ m. _giver of prosperity_.

êadga wk. form of êadig.

êadgian = êadigan

êadgiefa ¶ m. _giver of prosperity_.

êadgiefu ¶ f. _gift of prosperity_.

êadhrêðig ¶ _happy, blessed, triumphant_.

êadig _wealthy, prosperous_, _Cr_: _fortunate, happy, blessed, perfect_,
_Gu, VPs_; Æ, CP. ['_eadi_']

±êadigan _to count fortunate, call blessed_, HL: _enrich, make happy_.

êadiglic _prosperous, rich, happy, blessed_. adv. -lîce.

êadignes f. _happiness, prosperity_, Æ.

eadlêan == edlêan

êadlufu f. _blessed love_, #Jul# 104.

êadmêd, êadmôd == êaðmôd

êadmêtto = êaðmêttu

êadnes f. _inner peace, ease, joy, prosperity_, _Run_: _gentleness_.
['_eadness_'; êað]

êadocce f. _water-lily_.

eador = (1) geador, (2) eodor

êadorgeard m. _inclosure of veins, body_? (GK) #An# 1183 (or ? ealdor-).

eaduse (A 10·143^90) = adesa

êadwela ¶ m. _prosperity, riches, happiness_.

êæ v. êa.

eæ- = ea-

eafera = eafora

êafisc ¶ m. _river-fish_.

eafor I. mn? _the obligation due from a tenant to the king to convey
goods and messengers_? (BT), Ct. II. (*) _draught-horse_, v. LL 2·57.
III. = eofor, eafor- = eofor-

eafora ¶ m. _posterity, son, child_; _successor, heir_. [cp. _Goth._
afar]

eafoð ¶ n. _power, strength, might_.

eafra = eafora

eaftra = æfterra

êagæppel (a^2) m. _apple of the eye, eyeball_.

êagbr¯æw m. _eyelid_, _Lcd_ 1·352. ['_eyebree_']

êagduru f. _window_, MH.

êage (ê) n. '_eye_,' _G, Lcd_; AO, CP: _aperture, hole_, _Lk_.

êagêce m. _eye-ache_, #Lcd#.

êagflêah m. _albugo, a white spot in the eye_, WW.

êaggebyrd f. _nature of the eye_? #Ph# 301.

êaggemearc (êah-) n. _limit of view, horizon_, DD 148.

êaghring (êah-, êh-) m. _eye-socket, pupil_, Æ.

êaghðyrl = êagðyrel

êaghyll m. _eyebrow_, WW 415^22.

êaghyrne (hêah-) m. _corner of the eye_, WW 156^41.

êagmist (êah-) m. _dimness of the eyes_, #Lcd# 11a.

êagor == êgor

eagospind = hagospind

êagsealf f. '_eye-salve_,' _WW_.

êagsêoung f. _disease of the eye, cataract_, WW 414^12.

êagsýne _visible to the eye_. adv. -sýnes, Æ.

êagðyrel n. _eye-hole, window_, _BH_. ['_eye-thurl_']

êag-wærc, -wyrc, -wræc m. _pain of the eyes_, #Lcd#.

êagwund f. _wound in the eye_, LL 20[47].

êagwyrt f. _eye-wort, eye-bright_, #Lcd#.

êah- = êag-, êa-

eaht (a, æ, e) f. _assembly, council_. e. besittan _to hold a council_:
_esteem, estimation, estimated value_.

êaht = ¯æht

eahta (a, æ, e) '_eight_,' _B, Chr_; CP.

eahtafeald _eightfold_, Æ.

eahtahyrnede _eight-cornered_, Æ 2·496^33.

eahtan ¶ I. _to persecute, pursue_. II. _to estimate, appreciate_.

eahtanihte _eight day's old (moon)_.

eahtatêoða '_eighteenth_,' _AO_.

eahta-tîene, -týne '_eighteen_,' _Lk_ (eht-).

eahtatig _eighty_, AO.

eahtawintre _of eight years old_, Æ.

eahtend m. _persecutor_, #PPs# 118^150.

eahtêoða = (1) eahtatêoða, (2) eahtoða

eahtere m. _appraiser, censor_, #Lcd#.

eahteða (AO) = eahtoða

±eahtian (æ, e) _to estimate, esteem_, CP: _consult about, consider,
deliberate_: _watch over_, Æ: _speak of with praise_. [_Ger._ achten]

+eahtiendlic _estimable_.

êahtnes = êhtnes

eahtoða '_eighth_,' _Men_; #Chr#.

±eahtung f. _estimation, valuation_, CP: _deliberation, counsel_.

eal == eall, æl

eala == ealu

êalâ interj. _alas! oh! lo!_ Æ, AO, CP. [êa II.]

êalâd f. _watery way_, #An# 441.

êaland n. _island_, _Chr_.

ealað v. ealu.

ealbeorht = eallbeorht

êalc = ¯ælc

eald (a) comp. ieldra, yldra; sup. ieldest, yldest _'old,' aged,
ancient, antique_, _Æ, B, CP_; AO: _experienced, tried_: _honoured,
eminent, great_. ðâ ieldstan men _the chief men_.

ealda m. _old man_, RHy 6^25: _the Devil_.

ealdbacen _stale_, LL (360^27).

eald-cýðð (AO), cýððu f. _old home, former dwelling-place_: _old
acquaintance_, Æ.

ealddagas mp. _former times_, AO.

ealddôm m. _age_, AO.

ealde = ielde

ealdefæder m. _grandfather_.

ealdemôdor f. _grandmother_.

ealder = ealdor

ealdfæder m. _forefather_, _Æ_. ['_eldfather_']

ealdfêond (î) ¶ m. _old foe, hereditary foe, the devil_.

ealdgecynd ¶ n. _original nature_.

ealdgefâ m. _ancient foe_, AO 118^34.

ealdgefêra m. _old comrade_, AO 152^24.

ealdgenêat m. _old comrade_, #Ma# 310.

ealdgenîðla ¶ m. _old foe, Satan_.

ealdgeriht (a^1) n. _ancient right_, Ct.

ealdgesegen f. _ancient tradition_, B 869.

ealdgesîð ¶ m. _old comrade_.

ealdgestrêon n. _ancient treasure_, AO.

ealdgeweorc ¶ n. _old-standing work, the world_.

ealdgewinn n. _old-time conflict_, B 1781.

ealdgewinna m. _old enemy_, B 1776.

ealdgewyrht ¶ n. _former deeds_: _deserts of former deeds_? _traditional
usage_? B 2657.

ealdhettende mp. _old foes_, #Jud# 321.

ealdhlâford m. _hereditary lord_, AO, CP.

ealdhrîðer? n. _an old ox_.

±ealdian (a) _to grow old_, _Jn_; Æ. ['_eld_,' '_old_']

ealdland n. _land which has been long untilled_? (BT), _ancestral
property_? (Earle), EC 327^14.

ealdlandr¯æden f. _established law of landed property_, LL 448[4,6] (or ?
two words, BT).

ealdlic _old, venerable_, Æ.

ealdnes f. _old age_, _Æ_. ['_eldness_,' '_oldness_']

ealdor (a) I. m. _elder, parent_, _BH, Gen_. pl. _ancestors_: _civil or
religious authority, chief, leader, master, lord, prince, king_, Æ:
_source_: _primitive_, #ÆGr#. [eald; '_alder_'] II. n(f?) (¶) _life,
vital part_: (¶) _age, old age_: _eternity_. on ealdre tô ealdre _for
ever, always_. âwa tô ealdre, tô widan ealdre _for ever and ever_.
[_Ger._ alter]

ealdorapostol (a) m. _chief apostle_, BH 314^7.

ealdorbana (a^1) m. _life-destroyer_, #Gen# 1033.

ealdorbealu ¶ n. _life-bale, death_.

ealdorbiscop m. _chief bishop, archbishop_, Æ: _high-priest_, Æ.

ealdor-bold, -botl n. _palace, mansion_, BH.

ealdorburg f. _metropolis_.

ealdorcearu (a^1) f. _great sorrow_, B 906.

ealdordæg ¶ m. _day of life_.

ealdordêma (a^1) ¶m. _chief judge, prince_.

ealdordeofol m. _chief of the devils_, NC 282.

ealdordôm m. _power, lordship, rule, dominion, authority, magistracy_,
_PPs_; Æ, AO, CP: _superiority, preeminence_: _beginning_? #Jul# 190.
['_alderdom_']

ealdordômlic '_principalis_,' #EPs#.

ealdordômscipe? m. _office of alderman_, #Chr# 983#c#.

ealdorduguð ¶ f. _nobility, flower of the chiefs_.

ealdorfrêa (a^1) m. _lord, chief_, #Da# 46.

ealdorgeard m. _enclosure of life, body_, #An# 1183? (or ? êador-)

ealdorgedâl ¶ n. _death_.

ealdorgesceaft f. _state of life_, #Rd# 40^23.

ealdorgewinna ¶ m. _deadly enemy_.

ealdorlang _life-long, eternal_, ¶#Chr# 937#a#.

ealdorlêas I. _lifeless, dead_, B 15. II. _deprived of parents,
orphaned_: _without a chief_.

ealdorlegu ¶ f. _destiny_: _death_.

ealdorlic _'principalis,' chief, princely, excellent_: _authentic_. adv.
-lîce.

ealdorlicnes f. _authority_, CP.

ealdormann (o^3) [v. LL 2·359] m. _'alderman,' ruler, prince, chief,
nobleman of the highest rank, high civil or religious officer, chief
officer of a shire_, _Chr_; Æ, AO, CP: as trans. of foreign titles,
_JnL, Mt_.

ealdorneru ¶ f. _life's preservation, safety, refuge_.

ealdorsâcerd m. _high priest_.

ealdorscipe m. _seniority, headship, supremacy, sovereignty_, Æ.

ealdorstôl m. _throne_, #Rim# 23.

ealdorðegn ¶ m. _chief attendant, retainer, distinguished courtier,
chieftain_.

ealdorwisa (a^1) m. _chief_, #Gen# 1237.

ealdoð (ald-aht, -ot) _vessel_, #Gl#.

ealdriht n. _old right_.

Eald-Seaxe -Seaxan mp. _Old-Saxons, Continental Saxons_, AO.

ealdspell n. _old saying, old story_.

ealdspr¯æc f. _proverb, by-word_, #PPs# 43^15.

ealdung f. _process of growing old, age_, Æ, AO.

ealdur == ealdor

ealdwêrig? _accursed from old times_, #Ex# 50.

ealdwîf n. _old woman_, Æ.

ealdwita m. _venerable man, priest, sage_: _Pharisee_.

ealdwrîtere m. _writer on ancient history_, OEG 5449.

êales v. ealh.

ealfara m. _pack-horse_? A 4·147^200 (v. NC 282, 342).

ealfela ¶ _very much_.

ealfelo _baleful, dire_, #An# 771 (ælfælo), #Rd# 24^9.

ealgearo ¶ _all ready, prepared_.

±ealgian _to protect, defend_, Æ.

ealgodwebb n. _'holosericus,' all-silk cloth_, WW 395^15.

ealgodwebben _all-silk_, WW.

ealh (a) ¶ m., gs. êales _temple_.

ealhstede ¶ m. _temple_.

êalifer f. _liver-wort_? _Lcd_. ['_eileber_'?]

êalîðend m. _seafaring man_, #An# 251.

eall I. adj. (has no weak form) _'all,' every, entire, whole,
universal_, _Æ, Chr, Mt_. pl. _all men_, _Æ_. II. adv. _fully, wholly,
entirely, quite_, _Cr, GD, Gen_. e. swâ _quite as, just as_. e. swâ
micle swâ _as much as_. mid e. mid eallum _altogether, entirely_. ealra
swîðost _especially, most of all_. ealne weg (also contr. ealneg)
_always_. ofer e. (neut.) _everywhere, into all parts_. III. n. _all,
everything_.

ealla = gealla

eallbeorht ¶ _all-bright, resplendent_.

eallbyrnende _burning all over_, Æ.

eallcræftig ¶ (æl-) _all powerful_.

ealldryge _completely dry_, Æ.

eallencten m. _season of Lent_, RB 66^5.

eallenga = eallunga

ealles, ealle adv. (g. of eall) _entirely, wholly, fully, quite_. e. for
swîðe _altogether, utterly_.

eallgelêaflic _universally believed, catholic_.

eallgôd _all-good_, Æ.

eallgrêne ¶ _all-green, green_.

eallgylden _all-golden_, CP (æl-).

eallhâlig _all-holy_, #PPs# 131^8.

eallhwît _entirely of white_, Ct.

eallic _universal, catholic_.

eallinga = eallunga

eallîren _entirely of iron_, B 2338.

eallîsig _all-icy, very cold_.

eallmægen ¶ n. _utmost effort_.

eallm¯æst (al-, æl-) adv. _nearly all_, _'almost,' for the most part_,
_Æ, Chr_.

eallmiht f. _omnipotence_, #PPs# 135^12.

eallmihtig = ælmihtig

eallnacod _entirely naked_, #Gen# 871.

eallneg = ealneg

eallnîwe _quite new_, Æ.

eallnunge = eallunga

ealloffrung f. _holocaust_, WW 130^12 (eal-).

eallreord = elreord

eallrihte adv. _just, exactly_, RB 131^13.

eallseolcen _entirely made of silk_, #Gl#.

eallswâ _just as, even as_, _'as,' as if, so as, likewise_, _Æ, Mt_.

eallswilc _just such_, Æ.

ealltela adv. _quite well_, #Gen# 1905.

eallunga adv. _altogether, entirely, utterly, quite, indeed_, _Æ, Mt_;
CP. ['_allinge_']

eallwealda ¶ I. _all-ruling, almighty_. II. m. _God, the Almighty_.

eallwealdend m. _ruler of all_, Æ.

eallwealdende _'all-wielding,' all ruling_, _Æ_.

eallwihta ¶ fp. _all creatures_.

eallwriten adj. _holograph_, WW 463^28.

eallwundor n. _marvel_, #Ex# 578.

ealm- = eallm-

ealmihtig = ælmihtig

ealneg (AO, CP), ealneweg, ealnuweg, ealnig, ealning(a) _always, quite,
perpetually_.

ealnunga = eallunga

ealo == ealu

ealoffrung f. _holocaust_, WW 130^12.

ealogeweorc n. _brewing_, AO 222^7.

êalond = êaland

ealoð (AO) v. ealu.

ealowôsa m. _ale-tippler_, #Wy# 49.

ealsealf f. _'ambrosia,' an aromatic plant_.

ealswâ = eallswâ

ealtêawe = ælt¯æwe

ealu (ealo) m? n? gds. ealoð (AO), ealað; gp. ealeða _'ale,' beer_,
_Lcd_; Æ. [v. A 27·495]

ealubenc ¶ f. '_ale-bench_,' _B_.

ealuclyfa m. _beer-cellar_, OEG 4^42.

ealufæt n. _ale-vat_, #Lcd# 53b.

ealugafol n. _tax or tribute paid in ale_, LL 448.

ealugâl _drunk with ale_, #Gen# 2408.

ealugâlnes f. _drunkenness_, NC 282.

ealuhûs (a^2) n. _alehouse_, LL 228[1,2].

ealumalt (alo-) n. _malt for brewing_, #Lcd# 157a.

ealuscerwen f. _bitter drink_? (BT), _(ale-spilling), mortal panic_?
(Earle), B 770.

ealuscop m. _singer in alehouses_, LL.

ealuw¯æge ¶ n. _ale-flagon, ale-can_.

ealw- = eallw-

eam (#VPs#) = eom (v. wesan)

êam I. m. _uncle_ (usu. maternal; paternal uncle = fædera), AO.
['_eme_'; _Ger._ oheim] II. dp. of êa.

+êan _yeaning_, Æ.

±êanian _to bring forth young_ (usu. lambs), _Ps_ 77^71. ['_ean_']

êaôfer m. _river-bank_, #Met# 19^22.

eapel, eapl = æppel

eappul- = æppel-

ear _'occa,' harrow_? OEG 2359 (v. A 36·72).

êar I. n. _'ear' (of corn)_, _Mt_; AO. II. ¶ m. _wave, sea, ocean_.
III. ¶ m. _earth_: _name of the rune for =êa=_. IV. = ¯ær. V. = êare

êaracu f. _river bed_, KC 5·122^15.

earan- = earon

earb- = earf-

êarblæd (ê^1) n. _stalk, blade (of corn)_, _straw_.

earc, earce (a, æ, e) f. _chest, coffer_, _Rd_: '_ark_,' _Mt, Ps_; CP.
[_L._]

êarcl¯ænsend m. _little finger_, WW 265^1.

earcnanstân = eorcnanstân

êarcoðu f. _'parotis,' a tumour near the ears_, WW 113^31.

eard m. _native place, country, region, dwelling-place, estate,
cultivated ground_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _earth, land_: _condition, fate_,
¶_Hy_. ['_erd_']

eardbegenga m. _inhabitant_, #LPs#.

eardbegengnes f. _habitation_, #RLPs#.

eardcyððo f. _old acquaintance_ (eald-?).

eardeswræcca (#LPs# 118^19) = eardwrecca

eardfæst _settled, abiding_, AO.

eardgeard ¶ m. _place of habitation, world_.

eardgyfu ¶ f. _gift from one's native place_.

±eardian tr. and intr. _to inhabit, dwell, abide, live_, _AO, B_; Æ, CP.
['_erde_']

eardiend m. _dweller_, GD.

eardiendlic _habitable_, BH 366^10.

eardland n. _native land_, #PPs# 134^12.

eardlufe f. _dear home_? B 693.

eardrîce n. _habitation_, #Gu# 825.

eardstapa m. _wanderer_, #Wa# 6.

eardstede m. _habitation_, #Ph# 195.

±eardung f. _dwelling-abode, tabernacle_.

eardungburg f. _city of habitation_.

eardunghûs n. _tabernacle, habitation_.

eardungstôw f. _habitation, dwelling-place, tabernacle_, CP.

eardweall m. _land-rampart, bulwark_, B 1224?

eardwîc ¶ n. _dwelling_.

eardwrecca m. _exile_, LL 51n5.

eardwunung f. _dwelling in one's own country_, W 120^13.

êare n. '_ear_,' _Mt, Rd, VPs_; Æ, CP. [_Goth._ ausô]

êarede _having a handle_, WW 122^39.

êarefinger m. _little finger_, WW.

êarelipprica = êarliprica

earendel (eo) m. _dayspring, dawn, ray of light_.

earfað- = earfoð-

earfe f? _tare_. [_L._ ervum]

earfed- = (1) earfoð-; (2) yrfe-

earfeð == earfoð

êarfinger = êarefinger

earfod- = earfoð-

earfoð I. n. _hardship, labour, trouble, difficulty, suffering, torment,
torture_, AO, CP. [_Ger._ arbeit] II. adj. _hard, difficult,
troublesome_, _Æ, Bo_. ['_arveth_']

earfoðcierre (að-) _hard to convert_, MH 112^20.

earfoðcwide m. _hard or dark saying_, Æ.

earfoðcynn n. _depraved race_, #PPs# 77^10.

earfoðd¯æde _difficult_, CP 147^12.

earfoðdæg ¶ m. _day of tribulation_.

earfoðe I. (Æ, CP) = earfoð. II. adv. _with difficulty_.

earfoðfêre _difficult to pass through_, AS 44^7.

earfoðfynde _hard to find_, Æ. [cp. êaðfynde]

earfoðhâwe _difficult to be seen_.

earfoðhwîl f. _hard time_, #Seaf# 3.

earfoðhylde _evil-disposed, obstinate_, ÆH 1·400^1.

±earfoðian _to trouble_, #Ps#.

earfoðl¯ære _hard to teach_, GD 110^19.

earfoðl¯æte _hard to discharge_, WW 113^20.

earfoðlic _difficult, full of hardship_, _Æ_. ['_arvethlich_'] adv.
-lîce _with difficulty, painfully, reluctantly, hardly, scarcely_, _Mt_.
['_arvethliche_']

earfoðlicnes (Æ) = earfoðnes

earfoðmæcg ¶ m. _sufferer_.

earfoðnes f. _difficulty, hardship, trouble, affliction, pain,
misfortune_, _Æ_. ['_arvethness_']

earfoðrecce _hard to relate_, W 22^14.

earfoðrihte _hard to correct_, NC 283.

earfoðrîme _hard to enumerate_.

earfoðs¯ælig _unhappy, unfortunate_, #Cra# 8.

earfoðsîð ¶ m. _troublesome journey_: _misfortune_.

earfoðt¯æcne _difficult to be shown_, #Met# 20^147.

earfoððrâg f. _sorrowful time_, B 283.

earfoðwylde _hard to subdue_, #Lcd# 3·436^12.

earg (earh) _slothful, sluggish_, _Gn_: _cowardly_, _BH_; AO: _craven,
vile, wretched, useless_, _MtL_. ['_argh_'; _Ger._ arg] adv. earge.

eargêat = earngêat  [[under "earngêap"]]

êargebland ¶ n. _wave-blend, surge_.

êargespeca m. _whisperer, privy councillor_, WW 351^2. [= -spreca]

eargfaru ¶ f. _shower of arrows_.

±eargian (i, y) _to shun, fear, turn coward_, Æ: _terrify_.

earglic _slothful, shameful, bad_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

eargnes (arog-) f. _licentiousness_, MkR 8^38.

êargrund m. _bottom of the sea_, #Az# 40.

eargscipe m. _idleness, cowardice_: _profligacy_.

earh I. f. '_arrow_,' _LL_; #An#. II. == earg

êarhring m. '_ear-ring_,' _Æ_.

êarisc (êo) f. _rush, reed, flag_. [êa]

êarîð m. _water-stream_, #Guth# 20^5.

êarlæppa m. _external ear_, WW.

êarliprica m. _flap of the ear, external ear_, NG.

êarlocc m. _lock of hair over the ear_, WW 152^30.

earm (a) I. m. '_arm_' (of the body, sea, etc.), _AO, LkL_: _foreleg_,
Æ: _power_, _Jn_. II. _poor, wretched, pitiful, destitute, miserable_,
_Mk_; Æ, CP. ['_arm_'; _Ger._ arm]

earm-bêag, -bêah m. _bracelet_.

earmcearig ¶ _full of sorrows_.

earme adv. _miserably, badly_.

earmella m. _sleeve_, RB 136^23.

earmful _wretched, miserable_, #Lcd# 3·440´.

earmgegirela m. _bracelet_, WW 386^13.

earmheort _humble, poor in spirit_, CP 209^2: _tender-hearted,
merciful_.

earmhrêad f. _arm-ornament_, B 1194.

earmian _to pity, commiserate_.

earming m. _poor wretch_, Æ. ['_arming_']

earmlic _miserable, pitiable, mean_, _Met_. adv. -lîce. ['_armlich(e)_']

earmscanca m. _arm-bone_, LL 82[55].

earmsceapen _wretched, unfortunate, miserable_.

earmslîfe f. _sleeve_, RBL 93^9.

earmstoc m? _sleeve_, IM 128^110.

earmstrang _strong of arm, muscular_, WW 158^7.

earmswîð _strong of arm, muscular_, WW 435^33.

earmðu f. _misery, poverty_, _Bo_. ['_armthe_']

earn I. m. _eagle_, _El, Mt_; Æ. ['_erne_'] II. = ærn. III. = arn
(v. iernan)

earnan (#VPs#) = ærnan

earncynn n. _eagle tribe_.

earn-gêap (v. AB 19·164), -gêat, -gêot f. _vulture_, #Gl#.

±earnian (a) (w. g. a.) _to 'earn,' merit, win_: _labour for_, _Bo, Gu_.

earningland n. _land earned or made freehold_ (= bôcland; BT), Ct.

earnung f. _merit, reward, consideration, pay_, Æ: _labour_.

earo = gearo

earon (#VPs#) = sindon pres. 3 pl. of eom (v. wesan).

êaron = gêarum dp. of gêar.

earp _dark, dusky_, #Rd# 4^42. [_ON._ jarpr]

earpa = hearpa  [[form of "hearpe"?]]

êarplætt m. _box or blow on the ear_, Æ.

±êarplættan _to box the ears_, Æ.

êar-prêon, -ring m. _ear-ring_, Æ.

earre (N) = ierre

ears (æ) m. _posterior, fundament, buttocks_, _Æ_. ['_arse_']

ear-scripel, -scrypel (eo^1, y^2) m. _little finger_, #Gl#.

êarsealf f. _ear-salve_, #Lcd#.

earsendu np. _buttocks_, WW.

earsgang (ars-) m. _privy_: _excrement_: '_anus_.'

êarslege m. _a blow that strikes off an ear_, LL 20[46].

earsling _backwards_, _Ps_. ['_arselings_']

earslýra? m? _buttocks, breech_, Æ. [lîra]

earsode '_tergosus_,' _WW_. ['_arsed_']

êarspinl f. _ear-ring_, #Gl#.

earsðerl n. '_anus_,' WW 160^1.

eart 2 sg. of eom pres. of wesan.

earð I. == yrð. II. = eart

êarðan = ¯ær ðam (v. ¯ær II.)

earðe (N) = eorðe

êarðyrel n. _'fistula, arteria,' ear-passage_? (BT), WW 238^29. [or =
ears-ðyrel, -ðerl?]

earu = gearu

earun (#VPs#) = earon

êarwærc n. _ear-ache_, #Lcd# 14b.

êarwicga m. '_earwig_,' _Lcd, WW_.

earwunga _for nothing, gratuitously_: _without a cause_.

êas v. êa.

ease _'caucale,' an umbelliferous plant, wild carrot_? WW 202^1.

êaspring = ¯æspryng

êast I. adj. comp. êast(er)ra, sup. êastmest, êastemest _east,
easterly_. II. adv. _eastwards, in an easterly direction, in the east_,
_BH, Met_; AO. ['_east_']

êastæð n. _river-bank, sea-shore_, #Ma# 63.

êastan, êastane _from the east, easterly_, _AO_. ['_east_']

êastannorðan _from the north-east_, WW.

êastannorðanwind m. _north-east wind_, WW 364^5.

êastansûðan _from the south-east_, WW 3^4.

êastansûðanwind m. _south-east wind_, WW 144^3.

êastanwind (e^2) m. '_east wind_,' WW 143^36.

êastcyning m. _eastern king_, AO 148^35.

êastd¯æl m. _eastern quarter, the East_, AO.

êaste f. _the East_.

êastemest (AO) v. êast.

êastende m. _east-end, east quarter_, AO.

êastene = êastane  [[under "êastan"]]

Eastengle mpl. _the East-Anglians_: _East Anglia_.

êaster¯æfen m. _Easter-eve_, BH.

êasterdæg m. _Easter-day, Easter Sunday, day of the Passover_, Æ. on
ôðran Easter-dæge _on Easter Monday_, #Chr# 1053#c#.

êasterfæsten n. _Easter-fast, Lent_.

êasterfeorm f. _feast of Easter_, LL.

êasterfrêolsdæg m. _the feast day of the Passover_, Jn 13^1.

Êastergewuna m. _Easter custom_, ÆL 23b^643.

êasterlic _belonging to Easter, Paschal_, _Lk_. ['_Easterly_']

êastermônað m. _Easter-month, April_.

easterne _east_, _'eastern,' oriental_, _Gen, WW_; Æ.

êasterniht f. _Easter-eve_, #Hell# 15; MP 1·611.

êasterra v. êast.

Êastersunnandæg (tor) m. _Easter Sunday_.

êastersymbel (tro) n. _Passover_.

eastertîd f. _Easter-tide, Paschal season_, Æ.

êasterðênung f. _Passover_, Mt 26^19.

êasterwucu f. _Easter-week_.

êasteð = êastæð

êasteweard (e^2) _east, 'eastward,'_ _Mt_.

êastfolc n. _eastern nation_, WW 396^30.

êastgârsecg m. _eastern ocean_, AO 132^29.

êastgem¯ære n. _eastern confines_, AO 132^29.

êasthealf f. _east side_, #Chr# 894#a#.

êastland n. _the East_, _Æ_: _Esthonia_, AO. ['_Eastland_']

êastlang _to the east, eastwards, extending east_, #Chr# 893#a#.

êastlêode mp. _Orientals_, BH.

êastmest v. êast.

êastnorð _north-easterly_, AO.

êastnorðerne _north-east_.

êastnorðwind m. _north-east wind_, #Gl#.

êastor- = êaster-

êastportic n. _eastern porch_, Æ.

êastra v. êast.

êastre (usu. in pl. êastron, -an; gs. -es in N.) f. '_Easter_,' _BH,
WW_: _Passover_, _Bl, Mk_: _spring_.

êastrêam m. _stream, river_, #Da# 385.

+êastrian _to elapse (during Easter)_, W 208^24.

êastrîce n. _eastern kingdom, eastern country, empire_: _the east_, Æ,
AO: _East Anglia_.

êastrihte _due east, eastwards_, AO 17^14 (y).

êastrihtes (êst-) _due east_.

êastro, êastru = êastre

êastro- = êaster-

êastrodor m. _eastern part of the sky_, #PPs# 102^12.

êastron dp. of êaster.  [[headword spelled "êastre"]]

êasts¯æ f. _east sea_.

East-Seaxan, -Seaxe mpl. _East-Saxons_, _people of Essex_: _Essex_.

êaststæð n. _east bank of a stream_, Ct.

êastsûð _south-eastwards_, AO. be êastsûðan _to the south-east_.

êastsûðd¯æl m. _south-east part_, BH 264^22.

êastsûðlang _from east to south_, AO 22^17.

êastðêod f. _an eastern people_.

êast-weard, -werd _east, 'eastward,'_ _Ct, Mt_.

êastweardes _eastwards_, Æ.

êastweg ¶ m. _path in or from the east_.

eata (N) = eta imperat. of etan.

eatan = etan

eatol = atol

êað (ê, ý) = (1) êaðe, (2) îeð

êað-bede, -bêne _easy to be entreated_, #Ps#.

êaðbe-gêate, -gête _easy to get_.

êaðbylgnes f. _irritability_, NC 288.

êaðbylig (y^1, e^2) _easily irritated_, W 253^11.

êaðcn¯æwe _easy to recognise_, #ÆGr# 147^8.

êaðd¯æde (ý) _easy to do_.

êaðe (ê, êo) I. _easy, smooth, agreeable, kindly_. II. adv. _easily,
lightly, soon_, Æ, AO, CP: _willingly, readily_, Æ. ê. mæg _perhaps,
lest_. III. n. _an easy thing_.

êaðelic _easy, possible_, _Mt_: _insignificant, scanty, slight_, _BH_
(¯æ); Æ. ['_eathly_'] adv. -lîce (_Lk_).

êaðelicnes (êð-) f. _easiness_, WW 400^39.

êaðfêre _easy for travelling over_, WW 146^29.

êaðfynde (ê, ý) ¶ _easy to find_.

êaðgeorn (êð-) _easily pleased_, WW 218^16.

êaðgesýne (e^1, y^1, ê^3) ¶ _easily seen, visible_.

êað-gête, -gêate _easy to obtain, prepared, ready_, Æ.

êaðhrêðig = êadhrêðig

êaðhylde _contented, satisfied_, RB.

êað-l¯æce (â^2), -l¯æcne _easy to cure_.

êaðl¯ære (êad-) _capable of being taught, instructed_.

±êaðmêdan, -mêdian _to humble, humble oneself, prostrate oneself,
adore_.

êaðmêde = (1) êaðmôd, (2) êaðmêdu

êaðmêdlîce (êad-) _humbly_.

êaðmêdu, -mêdo (#Chr#) f. _gentleness, humility_, _Ps_: _obedience,
submission, reverence_: _goodwill_. _kindness, affability_. ['_edmede_']

êaðmêdum _humbly, kindly_.

êaðmelte = êaðmylte

êað-mêttu, -mêtto np. _humility, weakness, impotency_, CP.

êað-môd (CP), -mêde _humble-minded, gentle, obedient_, _Ps_:
_benevolent, friendly, affectionate, gracious_. ['_edmede_']

±êaðmôdian _to humble or submit oneself, obey_: (+) _condescend_: (+)
_adore, worship_.

êaðmôdig == êaðmôd

êaðmôdlic _humble, respectful_, CP. adv. _humbly, meekly_, CP: _kindly_.

êaðmôdnes f. _humility, meekness, condescension_, _Bo_ (êad-).
['_edmodness_']

êaðmylte _easily digested_, #Lcd#.

êaðnes f. _easiness, lightness, facility, ease_: _gentleness_.

êaðr¯æde (êð-) _easy to guess_, ES 36·326.

êaðwylte (êð-) _easily turned_, OEG 1151.

êaum dp. of êa.

êaw = (1) êa; (2) êow V.; (3) ¯æ(w).

êawan = îewan

êawdnes f. _'ostensio,' disclosure_, LL 412[3].

êawenga (AO) = êawunga

êawesc- = êawisc-

êawfæst == ¯æwfæst

êawian = îewan

êawisclic _manifest, open_. adv. -lîce.

êawisfirina = ¯æwiscfirina  [[under "¯æwiscferinend"]]

êawlâ = êalâ

êawu = êowu

êawunga (CP, Æ), êawunge (LG) adv. _openly, plainly, publicly_. [îewan]

êawyrt f. _river-wort, burdock_, #Lcd#.

eax (æ) I. f. _axis, axle, axle-tree_. II. = æcs

eaxelgespann n. _place where the two beams of a cross intersect_,
#Rood# 9.

eaxl, eaxel f. _shoulder_, Æ.

eaxlclâð m. _scapular_, Æ.

eaxle = eaxl

eaxlgestealla ¶ m. _shoulder-companion, comrade, counsellor_:
_competitor_? (BT).

eb- = ef-, eof-

êb- = ¯æb-

ebba (æ) m. _'ebb', low tide_, _Ma_.

±ebbian _to 'ebb,'_ _Gen_.

ebbind (êbind) '_tenacitas ventris_,' Ln 33^6. [_ON._ abbendi]

ebol- (N) = yfel-

Ebrêisc (e, i) _Hebrew_, _A, Jn_. ['_Hebreish_']

êc = êac

êca wk. m. form of êce adj.

êcambe = âcumbe  [[under "âcumba"]]

êcan = îecan

êccelic = êcelic

ece (æ) m. _'ache,' pain_, _BH, Lcd_; Æ. [acan]

êce _perpetual, eternal, everlasting_, _OET, VPs_; Æ, CP. adv.
_eternally, ever, evermore_. ['_eche_']

eced (æ) mn. _acid, vinegar_, Æ. [_L._ acêtum]

eceddrenc m. _acid drink_, #Lcd#.

ecedfæt n. _vinegar-vessel_, #Gl#.

êcelic _eternal, everlasting_. adv. -lîce _VPs_. ['_echliche_']

êcen = êacen

ecer = æcer

êcere gfs. of êce adj.

ecg f. _'edge,' point_, _B, Lk_; Æ, CP; Mdf: (¶) _weapon, sword,
battle-axe_, _B_.

ecgan _to sharpen_: _harrow_, _Cp_. ['_edge_']

ecgbana ¶ m. _slayer with the sword, murderer_.

ecgheard _hard of edge_, #An# 1183.

ecghete ¶ m. _sword-hatred, war_.

ecglâst mf. _sword's edge_.

ecgplega m. _battle_, #Jud# 246.

ecgðracu f. _hot contest_, B 596.

ecgung f. _harrowing_, WW 104^12.

ecgwæl n. _sword-slaughter_, #Gen# 2089.

êcilm- (M) = ¯æcelm-

eclinga (= ecgl-) _on the edge_, IM.

êcnes f. _eternity_, _VPs_. â on êcnesse _for ever and ever_.
['_echeness_']

êcre dfs. of êce.

êcsôð, êcsôðlîce (NG) _verily_.

ed- prefix, denotes _repetition, turning_.

êd- = êað-

+edbyrdan _to regenerate_, #Soul# 100.

edcêlnes f. _a becoming cool again_, #VPs# 65^11 (oe).

+edcennan _to regenerate, create_.

edcenning f. _regeneration_.

+edcîegan (ê^2) _to recall_, #LPs# 101^25.

edcierr (e, i, y) m. _return_, CP.

+edcucoda (ea^1) m. _man restored to life_, Æ.

edcwic _regenerate, restored to life_, CM 499.

±edcwician (cwyc-, cuc-) _to re-quicken, revive_, Æ.

edcwide (eð-) m. _relation, narrative_, WW 43.

edcynn- = edcenn-

edcyrr = edcierr

êde = êowde

eder == eodor

edesc = edisc

+edfrêolsian _to re-grant by charter_, EC 197n.

edgeong ¶ _becoming or being young again_.

edgift f. _restitution_, TC 202^33.

edgrôwung f. _growing again_, WW 149^21.

edgung = edgeong

edgyldan^2 (= ie) _to remunerate_, #Sc# 162^11.

edgyldend m. _remunerator_, #Sc# 127^17.

+edhîwian _to shape, conform, reform_.

edhwyrfan _to return, retrace one's steps_.

+edhyrtan _to refresh, recruit_, GPH 390.

+edhyspol? (+edyppol) '_recensendus_,' GPH 396 (v. ES 38·17).

edhwyrft m. _change, going back (to a former state of things)_,
_reverse_.

edisc m. _enclosed pasture, park_, _Gl, Ps_; Mdf. [v. '_eddish_']

edischenn f. _quail_, _VPs_.

ediscweard m. _park-keeper, gardener_, #Gl#.

ediung = edgeong

±edl¯æcan _to repeat, renew_, ÆL.

edl¯æcung f. _repetition_, LL (416^42).

edl¯æht pp. of edl¯æcan.

edlæs- = edles-

+edlæstan _to repeat_, ANS 84·6.

edlêan n. _reward, retribution, recompense, requital_, _Bo_; Æ, CP.
['_edlen_']

±edlêanian _to reward, recompense_.

±edlêaniend m. _rewarder_.

±edlêanung f. _recompense, remuneration, retribution_, #Gl#.

edlêc- = edl¯æc-

±edlesende _reciprocal, relative_, #ÆGr#.

edlesendlic _relative, reciprocal_. adv. -lîce.

edlesung (æ^2, y^2) f. _relation, relating_, #ÆGr#.

edm¯æle (ê) n. _religious festival_, WW 45^9.

edmêltid f. _festival time_, TC 158^20.

êdmôd = êaðmôd

ednêow- = ednîw-

ednîwan adv. _anew, again_.

ednîwe I. _renewed, new_, Æ. II. adv. _anew, again_, Æ.

±ednîwian (êo) _to renew, restore, reform_, Æ.

ednîwigend m. _restorer_, A 11·115^9.

ednîwinga (êo^2) _anew, again_.

±ednîwung f. _renewal, reparation, renovation_, Æ, CP.

êdo (NG) = êowde

edor == eodor

êdr- (A) = ¯ædr-

edrec = edroc

edreccan _to chew, ruminate_, WW 533^38. [= eodorcan; cp. edrocian]

edric = edroc

edrine = edryne

edring f. _refuge_? #Soul# 107.

edroc m. _gullet_, #Gl#: _rumination_, #Gl#.

edrocian _to ruminate_.

edryne m. _coming again, return, meeting_, #REPs# 18^7.

edsceaft f. _new creation, regeneration_.

edsihð (etsith) f. _looking again, respect_, WW 43^33.

+edstalian _to restore_, A 13·366^15.

±edstaðelian _to re-establish, restore_, Æ.

edstaðelig _renewed in strength_.

±edstaðeligend m. _restorer_, Æ.

edstaðelung f. _re-establishment, renewal_, Æ.

edstaðol- = edstaðel-

edðingung f. _reconciliation_, WW 172^40.

+edðrâwen '_retortus_,' OEG 1062.

êdulfstæf = êðelstæf

ed-walle, -welle = edwielle

edwendan _to return_, #RPs# 77^39.

ed-wenden, ¶ -wend f. _change, reversal, end_.

edwîd == edwît

edwielle (a, e, i) f. _eddy, vortex, whirlpool_.

edwihte? _something, anything_, #Gen# 1954.

edwille = edwielle

ed-winde, -wind f. _'vortex,' whirlpool_, #Gl#.

edwist f. _being, substance_, Æ: _sustenance, food_.

+edwistian _to feed, support_, #LPs# 22^2.

edwistlic _existing, substantive_, #ÆGr# 201^8.

edwît n. _reproach, shame, disgrace, scorn, abuse_, _Ps_; AO, CP.
['_edwit_']

edwîtan^1 _to reproach_, _VPs_. ['_edwite_']

edwîtful _disgraceful_, #Gl#. adv. -lîce.

edwîtian = edwîtan

edwîtlîf n. _life of dishonour_, B 2891.

edwîtscipe m. _disgrace, shame_, #Wald# 1^14.

edwîtspr¯æc ¶ f. _scorn_.

edwîtspreca m. _scoffer_, #Gu# 418.

edwîtstæf ¶ m. _reproach, disgrace_.

edwylm m. _whirlpool of fire_, #Whale# 73.

±edwyrpan _to amend, become better, recover, revive_.

edwyrping f. _recovery_, ÆH 2·26^29.

+edyppol v. +edhyspol.

efe- = efen-

efen (æfen, efn, emn) I. adj. _'even,' equal, like, level_, _AO_: _just,
true_, _Æ_: _calm, harmonious, equable_, _CP_. on efen v. onemn. II.
adv. _evenly_, _Æ, Ps_: _equally_, _Bo_: _exactly, just as_, _B, Cr_:
_quite, fully_, _CP, Gen_: _namely_, _Gu, Met_.

efen- often = _L._ con-.

êfen n. = ¯æfen

efenæðele _equally noble_.

efenâmetan = efenmetan

efenapostol (efn(e)-) m. _fellow-apostle_.

efenbehêfe (efn-) _equally useful or needful_, #Met# 12^7.

efenbeorht ¶ _equally bright_.

efenbisceop (-cop) m. _co-bishop_, BH 112^27.

efenblissian _to rejoice equally_.

efenblîðe _rejoicing with another_, MH 28^8.

efenboren _of equal birth_, LL (256^38).

efenbrâd _as broad as long_, ES 8·477.

efenbyrde _of equal birth_, ÆL 33^3.

efenceasterwaran mp. _fellow-citizens_, BH 62^20; GD 205^1.

efencempa m. _fellow-soldier_, Æ.

efencrîsten (em-) _fellow-Christian_, LL.

efencuman^4 _to come together, agree_.

efendýre _equally dear_, LL.

efenêadig _equally blessed_, ¶Hy 8^21.

efeneald _contemporary, coeval_, _Æ, Wid_. ['_evenold_']

efeneardigende _dwelling together_, #Cr# 237.

efenêce ¶ (efn-) _co-eternal_. adv. B.

efenedwistlic _consubstantial_, Æ.

efenêhð f. _neighbourhood_? _neighbouring district_? #Chr# 894#a# (v. BT
Supp.).

efenesne (efne-) m. _fellow-servant_, N.

efenetan _to eat as much as_, #Rd# 41^63.

efenêðe _just as easy_, #Met# 20^167 (efn-).

efenfela (eo^3) num. adj. _just so many, as many_, AO (em-).

efenfrê-fran, -frian '_consolare_,' #EPs# 125^1.

efenged¯ælan (efn-) _to share alike_, #Ex# 95.

efengefêon^6 _to rejoice together, sympathise_.

efengelic _like, co-equal_.

efengelîca m. _equal, fellow_.

efengemæcca (efn-) m. _companion, fellow, consort_, CP.

efengemyndig _commemorative_, #Bl# 101^1.

efengespittan '_conspuere_,' MkL 14^65.

efengôd (emn-) _equally good_, #Bo#.

efenhâda m. _an equal in rank, co-bishop_, GD 43^22.

êfenhâlig _equally holy_, #Bl# 45^18.

efenhêafda m. _fellow, comrade_, NC 283.

efenheafodling m. _mate, fellow_.

efenhêah _equally high_.

efenhêap m. _band of comrades_, WW 375^20.

efenhemman? _to fetter_, #EPs# 145^7.

efenheort _concordant, harmonious_.

efenheort(e)? -nes? _concord, harmony_, DR (æfne-).

efenherenes f. _praising together_, #CPs# 32^1.

efenherian _to praise together_, #VPs# 116^1.

efen-hlêoðor § n., -hlêoðrung f. _harmony, union of sounds or voices_.

efenhleoðrian _to sing together_, NC 283.

efenhlýte (ê^3) _equal in rank_, BH.

efen-hlytta, -hleta m. _sharer, partner_, Æ.

efenîeðe (ê) _just as easy_, #Met# 20^167.

±efenl¯æcan _to be like_: _make like, match, imitate_, _Æ_.
['_evenleche_']

efenl¯æcend m. _imitator_, Æ.

efenl¯æcere m. _imitator_, OEG 1957.

±efenl¯æcestre f. _female imitator_.

±efenl¯æcung f. _copying, imitation_, Æ.

efenlang (em-) _equally long_: prep. (w. d.) -lange _along_.

efenlâste f. _the herb mercury_, _Lcd_. ['_evenlesten_']

efenlêof (em-) _equally dear_, AO.

efenleornere m. _fellow-disciple_, OEG 56^264.

±efenlic _even, equal, comparable to, of like age_, _Cr_. ['_evenly_'].
adv. -lîce _equally, evenly, alike_: _patiently_.

efenlîca (efn-) m. _equal_, #Met# 20^19.

+efenlîcian _to make equal_, BH 372^31: (±) '_complacere_,' #AV^2Ps#
25^3.

efenlîcnes f. _evenness, equality_, _CP, Ps_. (em-). ['_evenliness_']

efenling (efn-) m. _consort, fellow_, #EPs# 44^8.

efenm¯ære (efn-) _equally famous_, #Met# 10^32.

efenmæsseprêost m. _fellow-priest_, GD 283^3.

efenmedome (efn-) _equally worthy_, MH 134^9.

efenmetan^5 _to assemble together_, #EPs# 61^9: _compare_, #VPs# 48^21.

efenmicel _equally great_.

efenmid adj. _middle_, #PPs# 73^12.

efenmihtig _equally mighty_, W 16^7.

efenmôdlîce _with equanimity_, OEG 2978.

efennêah adv. _equally near_.

efennêhð = efenêhð

efennes f. _equity, justice_: _comparison_.

efen-niht f., -nihte? n. _equinox_ (23 Sep.).

efenrêðe (emn-) _equally fierce_, AO 68^6.

efenrîce _equally powerful_, BH 416^9.

efensâcerd m. _fellow-priest_, A 11·7^4.

efensâre (emn-) _equally bitterly_, CP 413^29.

efensârgian _to sorrow together with, commiserate_, Æ.

efensârgung f. _sympathy_, GD 180^8.

efensârig adj. (w. d.) _equally sorry (with)_: _compassionate_.

efenscearp _equally sharp_, #PPs# 63^3.

efenscolere (emn-) m. _fellow-pupil_, AO 132^1.

efenscyldig _equally guilty_, LL.

efensorgian (efn-) _to be sorry for_, GD 345^18.

efenspêdiglic _consubstantial_, BH.

efenspr¯æc (efne-) _confabulation_, LkL p11^11.

efenstâlian _to prepare, make ready, execute_, WW 208^26. [=
*efenstaðelian]

efensung = efesung

efenswîðe (efn-) _just as much_, CP.

efentêam (efne-) m. _conspiracy_, JnL 9^22.

efentôwistlic _consubstantial_.

efenðegn (efne-) m. _fellow-servant_, NG.

êfenðênung f. _supper_.

efen-ðêow, -ðêowa m. _fellow-servant_, Æ, CP. -ðêowen f. _fellow-servant
(female)_, HL 18^256.

efenðrôwian _to compassionate, sympathise_, CP (efn-), Æ (em-).

efenðrôwung f. _compassion_, #Sc#.

efenðw¯ære _agreeing_, CM 32.

efenunwemme _equally inviolate_, LL 250[14].

efenw¯æge f. _counterpoise_, #Gl#.

efenweaxan _to grow together_, #Lcd#.

efenwel _as well_, LL (324^1).

efenweorð _of equal rank_: _very worthy_: _equivalent_.

efenwerod np. _comrades_, WW 381^16.

efenwesende _contemporaneous, co-existent_, #Cr# 350.

efenwiht n. _equal, fellow, associate_.

efenwrîtan (emn-) '_conscribere_,' #EPs# 149^9.

efenwyrcend m. _cooperator_, BH 464^25 (æ).

efenwyrhta (em-) m. _fellow-worker_, Æ.

efenwyrðe = efenweorð

efenyrfeweard m. _co-heir_, BH. [ierfe]

efeostlîce (#Chr# 1114#e#) = ofostlîce  [[form of "ofost"]]

efer = eofor

eferfearn = eoforfearn

êfern (N) = ¯æfen

efes, efesc f. _the 'eaves' (of a house)_, _LPs_: _brim, brink, edge,
border (of a forest)_, _side_, _Chr_.

efesdrypa = yfesdrype

±efesian _to clip, shear, cut_, _ÆGr_. ['_evese_']

efest (#VPs#) = æfest, ofost

efestan = efstan

efestlîce _hurriedly_, NG.

efesung f. _shearing, shaving, tonsure_, _Cp, WW_. ['_eavesing_']

efeta (_WW_) m., efete (Æ) f. _'eft,' newt, lizard_, Æ.

efgælð (OEG 8^168) = æfgælð

efn == efen

±efnan I. _to make even, level_, _Rd_ 28^8: _liken, compare_, _MtL_.
['_even_'; _ON._ jafna] II. = æfnan

efne I. adv. _even, evenly, equally, exactly, indeed, precisely, only,
just, alike, likewise, just now_. e. swâ _even so, even as, just as if,
when_. e. swâ ðêah _even though_. e. tô _next to_. II. (æ, eo) interj.
_behold! truly! indeed!_ Æ. [efen] III. f? _alum_, Æ. [cp. ælifne] IV.?
(æ) n. _material_, DR.  [["ælifne" form of "ælifn"?]]

efne- = efen-

efnenû interj. _behold now_, #CLPs# 7^15.

efnes _quite, exactly_.

±efnettan (emn-) _to equal, emulate_: _make even, adjust_: (+)
_compare_.

efnian = efnan I.

efol- = eoful-

efor == eofor

êfre = ¯æfre

efsian = efesian

±efstan _to hasten, hurry, make haste_, Æ. [ofost]

efstung f. _hastening_.

eft adv. _again, anew, a second time_, _Æ, VPs_; CP: _then, thereupon,
afterwards, hereafter, thereafter_, _Chr_; Æ: _back_, #Chr#: _likewise,
moreover_, _Mt_. ['_eft_']

eftâcenned _born again_, N.

eftâcenn(edn)es f. _regeneration_, N.

eft¯ærist (ê) _resurrection_, NG.

eftârîsan^1 _to rise again_, #VPs#.

eftbêtung f. _making whole_, NG.

eftboren _born again_, JnLR 3^5.

eftbôt f. _restoration to health_, NG.

eftcerran = eftcyrran

eftcneoreso _regeneration_, DR.

eftcuman^4 _to come back_.

eftcyme ¶ m. _return_.

eftcymeð pres. 3 sg. of eftcuman.

eftcynnes (= cen-) f. _regeneration_, NG.

eftcyrran _to turn back, return_, Æ.

eftedwîtan^6 _to reprove_, MtL 21^42.

efter == æfter

eftern? _evening_, LkL 24^29.

eftflôwan^7 _to flow back_, #HGl# 418; 462.

eftflôwung f. _redundance_, #HGl# 418^45.

eftforgifnes f. '_remissio_,' '_reconciliatio_,' NG, DR.

+eftgadrian _to repeat_, GD 277^1.

eftgeafung f. _remuneration_, DR 59^1.

eftgecîgan _to recall_, BH 250^21.

eftgecyrran = eftcyrran

eftgemyndgian _to remember_, DR.

eftgemyndig _remembering_, NG, DR.

eftgian _to repeat_, CP 421^10,11: (+) _restore, strengthen_.

efthweorfan^3 _to turn back, return_. efthweorfende, -hwyrfende
_recurring_, Æ.

eftlêan n. _recompense_, #Cr# 1100.

eftlêaniend m. _rewarder_, DR 89^15.

eftlîsing (ê) f. _redemption_, NG.

eftlôcung f. _'respectus,' regard_, DR 86^15.

eftmyndig _remembering_, NG.

eftnîwung f. _restoration_, DR.

eftonfônd? _receiver_, NG.

eft-reccan pres. 3 sg. -rehð '_subdere_,' OEG 5167.

eftryne m. _'occursus,' return_, #VPs# 18^7.

eftscêogian _to put one's shoes on again_, CM 687.

eft-selenes, -selnes, -tôselenes f. _requital_, NG, DR.

eftsittan^5 '_residere_,' #ÆGr# 157^5.

eftsîð ¶ m. _journey back, return_.

eftsîðgende _turning back, retreating_, WW 491^19.

eftsôna _a second time_, _Mk_: _soon after, again, likewise_, _Mt_.
['_eftsoon_']

eftspellung f. _recapitulation_, WW 491^24.

eftðercian? (-ðræcan) '_recalcitrare_,' _LkL_. (v. '_thrash_').

eftðingung f. _reconciliation_, DR 88^5.

eftwyrd f. _judgment day, resurrection day_? (or ? adj. _future_, GK),
#Ex# 539.

eftyrn = eftryne

efulsung = yfelsung

êg = îeg

êg- = ¯æg-, êag-, îeg-

eg v. eg-lâ-eg.

-êgan v. on-ê.

egcgung (WW 104^12) = ecgung

ege (æ) m. _'awe,' fear, terror, dread_, _Ps, MtL_; Æ, AO, CP:
_overawing influence_, _Æ_: _cause of fear_, _VPs_.

egean (WW 459^15) = ecgan

egeful _'awful,' inspiring or feeling awe_, _Æ, Bo_.

egelâf? f. _survivors of a battle_, #Ex# 370 (or ? êgorlâf, GK).

egelêas _fearless_, _CP_. ['_aweless_'] adv. -lîce, CP.

egelêasnes f. _boldness_, #Bl# 85^31.

egelic _terrible_, #SPs# 75^7.

egenu f. _chaff, husk_, WW 412^3.

egesa m. _awe, fear, horror, peril_: _monstrous thing, monster_:
_horrible deed_, W 281^4. [ege]

egesful = egeful

egesfullic _terrible_. adv. -lîce.

egesfulnes f. _fearfulness, fear_, #JPs#, LL.

egesgrîma m. _terror-mask, ghost_.

±egesian^1 _to frighten, terrify_, AO, CP: _threaten_, OEG 2481.

egesig (eisig) _terrible_, #Sat# 36.

egeslic _awful, dreadful, terrible, threatening_, CP. adv. -lîce.

egesung f. _threatening, terror_.

egeswîn n. _a kind of fish_, v. NC 284.

egeðe = egðe

egeðgetîgu npl. _harrowing implements_, LL 455[17].

egewylm m. _terrible wave_, #PPs# 106^24.

+eggian _to egg on, incite_, MkL 15^11.

êghw- = ¯æghw-

egide I. = ecgede pret. 3 sg. of ecgan. II. = egðe

egile = egle

egis- = eges-

egiðe = egðe

egl fn? _mote, beard, awn, ear (of barley)_: _claw, talon_. [_Ger._
achel]

eg-lâ-eg '_euge!_' #BRPs# 69^4.

±eglan tr. (_Jud, Lcd_) and impers. (_LL_) _to trouble, plague, molest,
afflict_, Æ, CP. ['_ail_']

egle I. _hideous, loathsome, troublesome, grievous, painful_, Æ. II. =
egl

eglian = eglan

êgnan v. on-ê.  [[under "onêgan"]]

êgnes f. _fear_, #EPs# 88^41.

egnwirht '_merx_,' #EPs# 126^3 (= gênwyrht? BT; âgenwyrht? ES 38·1).

êgo (NG) = êage

êgor n? _flood, high tide_, WW 386^29; 474^4.

êgorhere ¶ m. _flood, deluge_.

êgorstrêam ¶ m. _sea, ocean_.

egs- = eges-

êgs- = êges-, îegs-

egðe f. _harrow, rake_, #Gl#.

egðere m. _harrower_.

Egyptisc _Egyptian_.

eh == eoh

êh- = êag-, îeg-, îg-

eher (NG) = êar

ehhêoloðe = hêahhêoloðe  [[headword spelled "hêahhêolode"]]

ehsl = eaxl

eht == æht, eaht

ehta == eahta

±êhtan _to attack, persecute, pursue, harass_, Æ, AO, CP: _consider,
judge, observe_. [ôht]

ehtefeald = eahtafeald

êhtend m. _persecutor_, AO.

êhtere m. _persecutor_, Æ, CP.

êhtian = êhtan

êhtnes f. _persecution_, Æ, AO, CP.

êhtre = êhtere

êhtung f. _persecution_, AO 274^10.

ehtuwe (#Rd# 37^4) = eahta

êig == îeg

eige = ege

eis- = eges-

el m. _the letter =l=_.

el-, ele- (prefix) _foreign, strange_.

êl = (1) îl, (2) ¯æl

elan = eglan

elboga (Æ) = elnboga

êlc (NG) = ¯ælc

elch = eolh

elcian _to put off, delay_, Æ.

elciend m. _procrastinator_, Æ 12^166.

elcor adv. _else, elsewhere, otherwise, except, besides_, _BH_.
['_elchur_']

elcora, elcra, elcran adv. _else, otherwise_.

elcung (A) f. _delay_, Æ.

elcur = elcor

eld == ield

eldor == ealdor

ele m. _oil_, _Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP. ['_ele_'; _L._]

ele- = el-

elebacen _cooked in oil_.

elebêam m. _olive-tree_, Æ: _elder_? _privet_? EC 379´.

elebêamen _of the olive-tree_, WW 128^7.

elebêamstybb m. _stump of an elder_, EC 190^27.

elebearu m. _olive grove_, NG.

eleberge f. _olive_.

eleboga (_WW_) = elnboga

elebytt f. _oil-vessel, chrismatory_, WW 432^25.

electre = elehtre

eledrosna pl. _dregs of oil_, #Lcd# 1·310´.

elefæt n. _oil-vessel, ampulla_, _WW_. ['_elvat_']

elegrêofa m. _oil-vessel_? OEG (v. BT).

elehorn m. _oil-flask_, WW 434^7.

elehtre f. _lupine_. [_L._ electrum]

elelêaf n. _olive-leaf_? #Lcd# 102b.

elelêast f. _lack of oil_, GD 44^21.

elelendisc _strange, foreign_. as sb. _stranger, exile_.

elene = eolone

elesdrosna = eledrosna

elesealf f. _oil-salve, nard_, #HGl# 405.

eleseocche f. _oil-strainer_, WW 154^12.

elestybb m. _elder-stump_. [= ellen-]

eletredde f. _oil press_, GD.

eletrêow n. _olive_.

eletrêowen _of olive trees_.

eletwig n. _oleaster_, WW 460^28.

êleð m. _allodium, freehold_, #Gu# 38. [= êðel]

elewana m. _lack of oil_, GD 44^9.

elfen f. _nymph, spirit_, WW 352^10. [= ielfen]

elfetu = ilfetu

elfremed == ælfremed

elh = eolh

elhygd f. _distraction, ecstasy_.

ell = el

ell- = el-

ellærn (_Cp_), ellarn = ellen II. and III.

elland ¶ n. _foreign country_. ['_eilland_']

elle = ealle  [[under "ealles"]]

ellefne (_An_) = endleofan

ellen I. nm. (always n. in ¶) _zeal, strength, courage_, _B, Bo, Gu_.
on e. _boldly_. ['_elne_'] II. n. _'elder'-tree_, _Lcd_; Mdf. III. adj.
_of elder-wood_, #Lcd#.

ellenahse f. _elder ash_, #Lcd# 121b. [= asce]

ellencræft m. _might, power_, #PPs# 98^5.

ellend¯æd ¶ f. _heroic deed_.

ellende I. adj. _foreign, strange, exiled_. II. n. _foreign parts_.

ellenga = eallunga

elleng¯æst m. _powerful demon_, B 86.

ellengrâfa m. _elder-grove_, BC 2·469^27.

ellenheard ¶ _mighty, brave, bold_.

ellenhete m. _jealousy_, A 11·98^26.

ellenl¯æca m. _champion, combatant_, WW.

ellenlêaf n. _elder-leaf_, #Lcd# 122a.

ellenlêas _wanting in courage_, _Jul_. ['_ellenlaes_']

ellenlic _brave_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

ellenm¯ærðu ¶ f. _fame of courage_.

ellenrind f. _elder bark_, #Lcd#.

ellenrôf _courageous, powerful_, Æ.

ellensêoc _mortally wounded_, B 2787.

ellenspr¯æc f. _strong speech_, #Gu# 1128.

ellen-stubb, -stybb m. _elder stump_, Ct.

ellentân m. _elder twig_, #Lcd# 116b.

ellentrêow n. _elder-tree_, Ct.

ellenðrîste _heroically bold_, #Jud# 133.

ellenweorc ¶ n. _heroic deed_.

ellenwôd I. f. _zeal_, #PPs# 68^9. II. _furious_, #Jul# 140: _zealous,
earnest_, OEG 364.

ellenwôdian ¶ _to emulate_.

ellenwôdnes ¶ f. _zeal_.

ellenwyrt f. _elderwort, dwarf-elder_.

ellenwyrttruma m. _root of elder_, #Lcd# 101a.

elleoht n. _elision of the letter =l=_, OEG 5471.

ellern = ellen II.

elles adv. _in another manner, otherwise_, _Mt_; Æ, CP: _'else,'
besides_, _Bl, Seaf_; Æ, CP: _elsewhere_, OEG 2^252. e. hw¯ær, hwergen,
hwider _elsewhere_. e. hwæt _anything else, otherwise_.

ellnung = elnung

ellor ¶ _elsewhere, elsewhither, to some other place_. e. londes _in
another land_.

ellorfûs ¶ _ready to depart_.

ellor-g¯æst ¶, -gâst m. _alien spirit_.

ellorsîð m. _death_, B 2451.

ellreord, ellreordig = elreord

ellðêod == elðêod

elm m. _'elm,' elm-tree_, _Lcd_. [_L._ ulmus]

elm- = ælm-

elmboga = elnboga

elmrind f. _elm-bark_, #Lcd#.

eln f. _fore-arm, 'ell'_ (a foot and a half to two feet), _Mt, WW_; Æ,
AO, CP.

elnboga m. '_elbow_,' _WW_ (ele-); CP.

elne, elnes ds. and gs. of ellen.

elngemet n. _ell-measure_, #Gen# 1309.

±elnian _to emulate, be zealous_: _strengthen, comfort oneself_: _gain
strength_, #Lcd#.

elnung f. _comfort, consolation_, ÆL 23^525: _emulation, zeal_, Æ.

elone = eolone

elotr, eloðr (#Gl#) = elehtre

elpan- (#VPs#), elpen- = elpend-

elpend (y^1) m. _elephant_, AO.

elpendb¯ænen (elpan-, ylpen-) _of ivory_.

elpendbân n. _ivory_.

elpendtôð m. _ivory_, WW 397^27.

elpent = elpend

elra comp. adj. _other_, B 753. [*el; _Goth._ aljis]

el-reord, -reordig _of strange speech, barbarous_.

elreordignes f. _barbarism_, #Gl#.

-els masc. suffix for inanimate things, as in rêcels, w¯æfels.

eltst (Æ) = ieldest superl. of eald.

elðêod f. _strange people, foreign nation_, (in pl.) _foreigners,
enemies_: (pl.) _all people, all nations_, #Cr# 1084, 1337: _exile_, AO.

elðêod-gian, -ian _to live abroad, wander as a pilgrim_: (+) _make
strange, disturb_, #Sc# 106^19.

elðêodgung = elðêodung

elðêodig _foreign, strange, barbarous, hostile_, _Bo, Met_ (æl-); AO,
CP: _exiled_. wk. form mp. el-ðêodian, -ðêodigan _strangers, foreigners,
pilgrims, proselytes_. ['_altheodi_']

elðêodige (îo) _abroad_, LkR 15^13.

elðêodiglic (æl-) _foreign, strange, born abroad_. adv. -lîce.

elðêodignes f. _foreign travel or residence, pilgrimage, exile_, AO.

elðêodisc _foreign, strange_, Mt 27^7.

elðêodung f. _residence or travel abroad_, BH 332^18.

elðîd-, elðîed-, elðêod- = elðêod-

eluhtre = elehtre

elwiht = ælwiht

em m? _the letter =m=_.

em- = efen-, emn-, ym-, ymb-, ymbe-

êm- = ¯æm-

emb == ymb

embe == ymbe

embeht (NG) == ambiht

embehtian = ambihtan

embiht == ambiht

embren (æ^1, i^2) n. _bucket, pail_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ eimer]

emdenes, emdemes = endemes

emel = ymel

emer = omer

emleoht n. _elision of =m= before vowels in scanning verse_, OEG 5473.

emn == efen

emne == efne, efn-

emnet n. _plain_, AO 186^22. [efen]

emtwâ (on) _into two equal parts, in half_, Æ.

-en suffix I. _diminutive_ (neut.) as in mægden (from mægð). II. _to
form feminines_ (a) _with mutation_ (gyden, _from_ god). (b) _without
mutation_ (ðêowen _from_ ðêow). III. _adjectival, with mutation,
denoting material_.

ên- = ân-

end conj. = and

+endadung f. _finishing_.

ende m. _'end,' conclusion_, _Mt_: _boundary, border, limit_, _Ps_; Æ,
AO, CP: _quarter, direction_: _part, portion, division_, AO: _district,
region_, AO: _species, kind, class_: _death_. æt (ð¯æm) e. _finally_.

ende-berd-, -bird-, -bred- = endebyrd-

endebyrd f. _order_, #Met# 13^4.

±endebyrdan _to put in order, arrange, ordain, dispose_, Æ.

endebyrdend m. _one who orders or arranges_, OEG.

endebyrdes ¶ _in an orderly manner, regularly, properly_.

endebyrdian = endebyrdan

endebyrdlic _ordinal_, #ÆGr# 282^14. adv. (±) -lîce _in an orderly
manner, in order, in succession_, Æ, CP.

endebyrdnes f. _order, succession, series, arrangement, method, rule_,
Æ, CP: _grade, degree, rank, condition_, Æ, CP.

endedæg ¶ m. _last day, day of death_.

endedôgor ¶ mn. _last day, death-day_.

endefæstend m. _finisher_, DR 27^15.

endefurh f. _end-furrow_, Ct.

endelâf f. _last remnant, last_, B 2813.

endelêan ¶ n. _final retribution_.

endelêas, -lêaslic (Æ) _'endless,' boundless, eternal_, _Bo_. adv.
-lîce, Æ.

endelêasnes f. _endlessness, infinity, eternity_, #ÆGr# 116^10.

endelîf n. _life's end, death_, #El# 585.

endemann m. _man of the world's (supposed) final age_, Æ.

endemes (Æ, CP), endemest adv. _equally, likewise, at the same time,
together, unanimously_: _fully, entirely_: _in procession_.

endemest (ænde-) _last_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

endemestnes f. _extremity_ (v. MF 157).

ende-nêhst, -nêxt (î, ý) _extreme, final, last_, Æ.

enderîm m. _number_, #Sat# 12.

endes¯æta m. _border-watchman_, B 241.

endesp¯æc f. _epilogue_, CM 1166.

endestæf ¶ m. _end, conclusion_.

endetîma m. _end of life, last hour_.

endeðr¯æst (ænde-) f. _end, destruction_, GD 337^9.

±endian _to 'end,' finish_, Æ: _abolish, destroy_, _JnR, Ps_; AO, CP:
_to come to an end, die_, _Gu_; AO.

endleofan (e^2, i^2, u^2, y^2; o^3) num. '_eleven_,' _Æ, BH_.

endlifangilde _entitled to eleven-fold compensation_, LL 3[1]; 470[7].

end-lyfta, -leofta, -leofeða '_eleventh_,' _Bl, Mt_.

endlyfte _in the eleventh place, eleventhly_, LL 182[11].

+endodlic _finite_, #Bo# 44^21.

±endung f. _'ending,' end_, _Mt_; CP: (+) _death_.

endwerc n. _pain in the buttocks_, #Lcd# 174a. [wærc]

ened (æ^1, i^2) mf. _drake, duck_, _Gl_. ['_ende_']

enelêac = ynnelêac

ênetere = ânwintre

ênga = ânga

enge I. (a, æ) _narrow, close, straitened, constrained_: _vexed,
troubled, anxious_: _oppressive, severe, painful, cruel_. II. (a, o)
adv. _sadly, anxiously_.

+enged _troubled, anxious_, WW 357^7.

engel (æ) m. _'angel,' messenger_, _Mt_; Æ, CP. [_L._ angelus]

Engel = Angel

engelcund _angelic_, #Gu# 72.

engelcynn ¶ n. _race or order of angels_.

engellic _angelic, of angels_, Æ.

engetrêow = hengetrêow

Englaland n. _country of the Angles, 'England,'_ _BH_.

Englan, Engle mp. _the Angles_ (as opposed to the Saxons): _the English
generally_. [Angel]

englelic = engellic

Englisc '_English_,' _Æ, LL_; CP. on E. _in (the) English (language)_,
_ÆGr, BH, Mt_.

Engliscmann m. '_Englishman_,' _LL_.

engu ¶ f. _narrowness, confinement_.

enid = ened

ênig = ¯ænig

ênitre = ânwintre

enlefan = endlufon  [[under "endleofan"]]

ênlîpig = ânlîpe

enne-lêac, -lêc = ynnelêac

eno = heonu

ent m. _giant_, Æ, AO.

entcynn n. _race of giants_.

entisc _of a giant_, B 2979.

entse = yndse

ênwintre = ânwintre

eobor = eofor

eobot = eofot

êoc = gêoc

êode I. pret. 3 sg. of gân. II. = êowde

eodor ¶ m. _hedge, boundary_: _limit, region, zone_: _inclosure, fold,
dwelling, house_: _prince, lord_.

eodor-brecð f., -brice m. _breach of an inclosure, house-breaking_, LL.

eodorcan _to chew, ruminate_, BH 346^2. [= edrocian]

eodorgong (eder-) m. _begging_? (GK) _robbery_? (Liebermann), #Cr# 1676.

eodorwîr m. _wire fence_, #Rd# 18^2.

eodur = eodor

eofel = yfel

eofer == eofor

eofera = eafora

eofermodig = ofermodig  [[headword spelled "ofermôdig"]]

eofet = eofot

eofne = efne

eofole f? _danewort, endive_? #Lcd#.

eofon = heofon

eofor (e^1, ea^1, e^2) m. _boar, wild boar_, _Lcd, Ps_: _boar-image on a
helmet_. ['_ever_']

eofora = eafora

eoforcumbol n. _boar-image on a helmet_? _boar-shaped ensign_? #El# 76;
259.

eoforfearn (e^1) n. _a kind of fern, polypody_, _Lcd, WW_.
['_everfern_']

eoforheafodsegn (ea^1) n. _banner with a boar's head design_? B 2152.

eoforlîc m. _boar-image (on a helmet)_, B 303.

eoforspere (u^2) n. _boar-spear_, OEG 7^56.

eoforsprêot n. _boar-spear_, #Gl#.

eoforswîn n. _boar_, #Lcd# 98b.

eoforðring m. _(boar-throng), the constellation Orion_.

eoforðrote f. _carline thistle_, #Lcd#.

±eofot n. _crime, sin, guilt_.

eofoð = eafoð

eoful- (A) = yfel-

eofur (#VPs#) = eofor

eofut (NG) = eofot

êogor = êgor

eogoð = geoguð

eoh ¶ nm., gs. êos _war-horse, charger_: _name of the rune for =e=_.
[_Goth._ aihwa]

êoh ¶ [= îw] m. _yew-tree_: _name of the rune for =êo=_.

eola, eolc == eolh

eoldran = ieldran  [[form of "ieldra"?]]

eolene = eolone

êoles gs. of eolh.

eolet n. _voyage_? (Cosijn), B 224.

eolh m. [g. êoles] _elk_.

eolh-sand (-sang, #HGl# 431) n. _amber_, #Gl#.

eolhsecg (eolhx-, eolx-, ilug-) m. _'papyrus,' reed, sedge_, #Gl#: _name
of a rune_, #Run# 15.

eolhstede = ealhstede

eolone f. _elecampane_.

eoloð = ealað (v. ealu)

eolxsecg = eolhsecg

eom I. v. wesan. II. = heom, him dp. of hê, hêo, hit

eond == geond

eonde ?= ende (but v. JAW 31)

eonu = heonu

eor- = ear-, ier-

êor- = êar-

eorcnanstân, eorc(l)anstân m. _precious stone_. [_Goth._ -airkns]

êored (o^2) nf. _troop, band, legion, company_. [eoh, râd]

êoredcist (o^2, ie^3, e^3, y^3) ¶ f. _troop, company_.

êoredgeatwe fpl. _military apparel_, B 2866.

êoredgerîd n. _troop of horsemen_, WW 229^1.

êoredhêap m. _troop, host_, DD 113.

êoredmæcg m. _horseman_, #Rd# 23^3.

êoredmann m. _trooper, horseman_, BH, WW.

êoredmenigu f. _legion_, #Gd#.

êoredðrêat m. _troop, host_, #Rd# 4^49.

êored-weorod, -wered n. _band, company_, GD 71^6.

eorl m. _'earl,' nobleman_ (origly. a Danish title = the native
'ealdorman'), _Ct, LL, Ma_: (¶) _brave man, warrior, leader, chief_,
_Cr, Gen, Rd_: _man_.

eorlcund _noble_, LL.

eorldôm m. _earldom, rank of an earl_, #Chr#.

eorlgebyrd ¶ f. _noble birth_.

eorlgestrêon ¶ n. _treasure, wealth_.

eorlgew¯æde n. _armour_, B 1442.

eorlic (1) = ierlic; (2) eorllic

eorlisc _of noble rank_, LL 173.

eorllic _chivalrous, manly_.

eorlmægen ¶ n. _band of noble warriors_.

eorlriht n. _earl's right_, LL 458[5].

eorlscipe ¶ m. _manliness, courage_.

eorlweorod n. _host of noble warriors_, B 2893.

eormencynn (y^1) ¶ n. _mankind_.

eormengrund n. _wide world_, B 859.

eormenlâf f. _huge legacy_, B 2234.

eormenstrýnd f. _race, generation_, #Sol# 329.

eormenðêod (y^1) f. _mighty people_, #Men# 139.

eorn- = georn-

eornes f. _anger_, #Bl# 123^8; HL.

eornest == eornost

eornost f. _earnestness, zeal_, Æ, CP. on eornost(e) _in earnest,
earnestly, truly_: _seriousness_, W: _battle_. ['_earnest_']

eornoste (e^2) I. _'earnest,' zealous, serious_, _Æ_. II. adv.
_earnestly, seriously, courageously_: _fiercely_.

eornostlîce I. adv. _'earnestly,' strictly, truly, in truth, indeed_,
_Mt, LL_. II. conj. _therefore, but_.

eornust == eornost

êorod == êored

eorð = eorðe, heorð

eorð-æppel m. nap. -æppla _'earth-apple,' cucumber_, _Æ_:
'_mandragora_,' _WW_.

eorðærn (e^2) n. _earth-house, grave_.

eorðbeofung (i^2) f. _earthquake_, AO.

eorðberge f. _strawberry_, WW 242^6. [berie; _Ger._ erdbeere]

eorðbîgenga m. _earth-dweller_, BH 268^31.

eorðbîgennes f. _agriculture_, WW 144^21.

eorðbrycg f. _bridge of poles covered with earth_, BC 3·223^21.

eorð-bûend ¶, -bûg(ig)end m. _earth-dweller, man_, Æ.

eorðburh = eorðbyrig

eorðbyfung = eorðbeofung

eorðbyrgen f. _grave_, NC 284.

eorðbyrig f. _earthwork, mound, embankment, road_.

eorðcafer m. _cockchafer_, WW 122^16. [ceafor]

eorð-cenned, -cend _earth-born_, #Ps#.

eorðcræft m. _geometry_, OEG 3119.

eorð-crypel, -cryppel m. _paralytic, palsied man_, NG.

eorðcund, eorðcundlic (CP) _sprung from the earth, earthly_.

eorðcyning m. _earthly king, king of the country_.

eorðcynn n. _human race_, #Ex# 370.

eorðdenu f. _valley_, NC 284.

eorðdraca § m. _dragon that lives in the earth_.

eorðdyne m. _earthquake_, _Chr_ 1060. ['_earth-din_']

eorðe f. _ground, soil_, _Æ, B, LkL_; AO, CP: _'earth,' mould_, _Gu_:
world, _Æ, B, Mt_: _country, land, district_, _Jn_.

eorðen adj. _of or in the earth_, OEG 3312?

eorðern = eorðærn

eorðfæst _'earthfast,' firm in the earth_, _Æ_.

eorðfæt n. _earthly vessel, body_, #Soul# 8.

eorð-gealla, -galla m. _earth-gall, lesser centaury_.

eorðge-byrst, -berst n. _landslip_, Ct.

eorðgem¯ære n. _boundary of the earth_, #PPs# 21^25.

eorðgemet n. _geometry_, #Gl#.

eorðgesceaft f. _earthly creature_, #Met# 20^194.

eorðgræf n. _hole in the earth_, #Rd# 59^9.

eorðgrâp f. _earth's embrace_, #Ruin# 6.

eorðhele m. _a covering of the ground_.

eorðhrêrnes f. _earthquake_, #Bl#, NG.

eorðhûs n. _cave-dwelling, den_.

eorðifig (y^2) n. _ground ivy_, #Lcd# 1·212.

eorðlic _'earthly,' worldly_, _Bl, Mt_; Æ. adv. -lîce.

eorðling = yrðling

eorðmægen n. _earthly power_, #Rim# 69.

eorð-mata [-maða?] m. _'vermis,' worm_, #Gl#.

eorðmistel m. _basil (plant)_, #Lcd# 33a.

eorðnafela m. _asparagus_, #Lcd#.

eorðnutu f. _'earth-nut,' pig-nut_, _Ct_. [hnutu]

eorðreced n. _cave-dwelling_, B 2719.

eorðrest f. _bed laid on the ground_, WW 362^11.

eorðrîce ¶ n. _earthly kingdom, earth_.

eorðrima m. _a plant_, #Lcd# 120a.

eorðscræf n. ds. -scrafe _cave-dwelling, cavern_, CP: _sepulchre_.

eorðsele ¶ m. _cave-dwelling_.

eorðslihtes _close to the ground_, Æ.

eorðstede m. _earth_, #PPs# 73^7.

eorðstirung = eorðstyrung  [[under "eorðstyren"]]

eorð-styren (GD), -styrennes (NG), -styrung (Æ) f. _earthquake_.

eorðtilia m. _'earth-tiller,' husbandman, farmer_, W 305^31.

eorðtilð f. _'earth-tilth,' agriculture_, _WW_.

eorðtûdor n. _human race_, #PPs# 117^22.

eorðtyrewe f. _earth-tar, bitumen_, AO 74^17.

eorðu (N) = eorðe

eorðwæstm f. _fruit of the earth_.

eorð-waran (CP), -ware mpl., -waru fpl. _earth-dwellers_, _AO_.
['_earthware_']

eorðweall m. _earth-wall, mound_.

eorðweard m. _region of earth_, B 2334.

eorðweg ¶ m. _earth_.

eorðwela m. _wealth_: _fertility_, AO.

eorðweorc n. _work on the land_.

eorðwerod n. _inhabitants of earth_, W 25^21; 203^5.

eorðwestm = eorðwæstm

eorðyfig = eorðifig

êorwicga = êarwicga

êos gs. of eoh.

eosel, eosol = esol

eosele f. _she-ass_, #Bl#.

êost- = êast-

eosul = esol

eotan (#VPs#) = etan

Eotas = Eotenas

eoten ¶ m. _giant, monster, enemy_. [_ON._ iotonn]

Eotenas mpl. _Jutes_.

eotend (= etend) _voracious, gluttonous_, WW 396^8; 523^6.

eotenisc _gigantic_, _B_. ['_etenish_']

Eotolware mp. _Italians_, BH 108^11.

êoton = ¯æton pret. pl. of etan.

eotonisc = eotenisc

eotonweard f. _watch against monsters_? B 668.

êoðe (N) = êaðe

êow I. dat. of gê pers. pron. _to you, you_. II. interj. _wo! alas!_
III. = gîw. IV. = îw. V. m. _sheep_.

êowâ = êow II.

êowan = îewan

êowberge = îwberge

êowcig = êowocig

êowd f. _sheepfold_, Æ: _flock, herd_, Æ.

êowde n. _flock (of sheep)_, _herd_, Æ.

êowdescêap n. _sheep of the flock_, #PPs# 64^14.

êowe I. gs. of êowu. II. = êwe

êowed = êowd

êowede = êowde

êowende (dat.) '_testiculis_,' LL 64[25,1].

êower I. gp. of gê pers. pron. (2nd pers.). II. possess. pron. _your,
yours_.

êowerlendisc _of your land, 'vestras,'_ #ÆGr# 94^1.

êowestre m. _sheepfold_.

êowian = îewan

êowic acc. pl. of ðû (v. gê).  [[under "ðu"]]

êowistre = êowestre

êowocig _of a ewe, ewe's_, #Lcd# 16a.

êowod = êowd

êowode = êowde

êowohumele f. _female hop-plant_, #Lcd#.

êowomeoluc f. _ewe's milk_, #Lcd# 70a.

êowu f. '_ewe_,' _Æ, LL_.

êowunga = êawunga

epistol m. _letter_.

epl, eppel = æppel

eppan = yppan

êr = (1) ¯ær, (2) ýr, (3) êar I.

er- = ær-, ear-, ier-, yr-

êr- = ¯ær-, êar-

erce == arce

ercnastân (NG) = eorcnanstân

eretic _heretical_. [_L._]

erian, erigean _to plough_, _Æ, Bo, Lk_; CP. ['_ear_']

erinaces pl. _hedgehogs_, #PPs# 103^17.

eringland n. _arable land_, Ct.

eriung f. _ploughing_, WW 104^6.

ernð (æ) f. _crop of corn_, BH 44^23#c#.

ersc m? _stubble-field_, EC 282´; 290´.

erschen f. _quail_, Æ, WW.

êsa v. ôs.

êsceap = ¯æsceap

esl = eaxl

esne m. _labourer, slave, servant, retainer_: _youth, man_, CP. [_Goth._
asneis]

esnecund _of a labourer_, WW 212^44.

esnemon (æ^1) m. _hireling_, JnR 10^13.

esnewyrhta m. _mercenary, hireling_.

esnlîce _like a man, manfully_, Æ, CP.

esol mf. _ass_, CP. [_L._ asellus]

ess m. _name of the letter =s=_.

essian _to waste away_, #RPs# 118^139.

êst mf. _favour, grace, bounty, kindness, love_, _An, B_: _harmony,
consent_: (in pl.) _delicacies_, _WW_; Æ. ['_eate_']

êstan (w. d.) _to live luxuriously_, W 190^17.

êstan = êastan

êste _gracious, liberal_, _B, Gen_. ['_este_']

êstelic _kind, gracious_, #EPs# 68^17: _delicate, dainty (of food)_, MF
(Vesp. D xiv). adv. -lîce, CP.

êstful _gracious, devoted, devout_, Æ: _fond of luxuries_, _WW_
218^18,19. ['_estfull_'] adv. -lîce.

êstfulnes f. _devotion, zeal_, CP: _luxury, lechery_.

êstgeorn _delicate, fond of luxuries_, WW 218^18.

êstig _gracious, liberal_, #Pa# 16.

êstines f. _benignity_, #EPs# 64^12.

êstlic == êstelic

êstmete m. _dainty, delicacy, luxury_, Æ.

-estre = f. agent, as in wîtegestre, _prophetess_.

êstum _freely, willingly, gladly_.

esul = esol

esulcweorn f. _mill-stone turned by an ass_, CP 31^17.

êswic == ¯æswic

et I. = æt prep. II. pres. 3 sg. of etan.

et- = æt-, ed-

êt (NG) == æt

±etan^5 (ea, eo) _to 'eat,'_ _Æ, AO, Jn_: _devour, consume_, _Jn_; CP:
(reflex.) _provision oneself_: (+) _eat together_.

etelond n. _pasture land_, KC 2·95^14.

etemest = ytemest  [[headword spelled "ýtemest"]]

eten = eoten

etend m. _eater, glutton_.

etenl¯æs f. _pasture_, LL 452[20].

etol (ettul) _voracious_.

etonisc (_B_) = eotenisc

etsomne = ætsamne

etst = itst pres. 2 sg. of etan.

ettan _to graze, pasture land_, AO 18^25.

ettulnes f. _greediness, gluttony_, #Sc# 55^6.

êð I. comp. adv. _more easily_. II. = ýð

eð- = æð-, ed-

êð- = ¯æð-, êað-, îð-, ýð-

eðcwide (#Gl#) = edcwide

êðe ¶ _barren, waste, desolate_. [_Ger._ öde]

êðel (oe, N) mn. gs. êðles _country, native land, home_, _Lk, Met_; CP.
¶hw¯æles ê. _the sea_, #Chr# 975#a#: _name of the rune for =[oe]=_.
['_ethel_']

êðelboda m. _land's apostle, native preacher_, #Gu# 976.

êðelcyning m. _king of the land_, #Cr# 997.

êðeldrêam m. _domestic joy_, #Gen# 1607.

êðeleard ¶ m. _native dwelling_.

êðelfæsten ¶ n. _fortress_.

êðelland ¶ n. _fatherland, country_.

êðellêas ¶ _homeless, exiled_.

êðelmearc ¶ f. _boundary of one's country, territory_.

êðelrîce ¶ n. _native country_.

êðelriht ¶ n. _hereditary right_.

êðel-seld ¶, -setl ¶ n. _settlement_.

êðelstæf (ul, yl) m. _heir, successor_.

êðelstaðol ¶ m. _settlement_.

êðelstôl ¶ m. _hereditary seat, habitation_: _royal city, chief city_.

êðelstôw ¶ f. _dwelling-place_.

êðelturf ¶ f. (ds. -tyrf) _fatherland_.

êðelðrymm § m. _glory of one's own land_.

êðelweard ¶ m. _lord of the realm, man_.

êðelwynn ¶ f. _joy of ownership_.

êðgung f. _breath, breathing, inspiration_: _hard breathing_, RB 68^3.

±êðian _to breathe_, _GD_: _smell_. ['_ethe_']

êðr (N) = ¯ædr, ¯ædre  [[under "æddre"]]

eðða (MtR) = oððe

êðung I. f. _laying waste, destroying_, #Gl#. [êðe, îðan] II. = êðgung

eðwilte _easily turned_, OEG 1151.

êuwâ interj. _woe!_ #Gl#.

êw- = ¯æw-, êaw-, êow-

êwe = êowu

ex, exe f. _brain_, #Lcd# (v. A 30·129).

ex == eax

exen v. oxa.

exlistealla ?= eaxlgestealla

exorcista m. _exorcist_, ÆL 31^141.




=F=


fâ v. fâh I.

faca gp. of fæc.

fâcen n. nap. fâcnu _deceit, fraud, treachery, sin, evil, wickedness,
crime_, _Mt, LL_; Æ, AO: _blemish, fault (in an object)_, LL 114[56];
398[9]. ['_faken_']

fâcend¯æd f. _sin, crime_, #PPs# 118^53.

fâcen-ful, -fullic _deceitful, crafty_.

fâcengecwis f. _conspiracy_, WW.

fâcengeswipere n. _deceit_, #PPs# 82^3.

fâcenlêas _guileless_: _pure_, NG.

fâcenlic _deceitful_, RB 95^12,15. adv. -lîce, Æ. ['_faken_']

fâcensearu ¶ n. _treachery_.

fâcenstafas mp. _treachery, deceit_, B 1018.

fâcentâcen n. _deceitful token_, #Cr# 1566.

facg m. _plaice_? _loach_? WW 180^32.

fâcian _to try to obtain, get_, AO 152^7.

fâcn == fâcen

fâcne = f¯æcne

facum dp. of fæc.

±fadian _to arrange, dispose, guide_, Æ.

fadiend m. _manager_, OEG 56^308.

±fadung f. _arrangement, order, disposition, dispensation, rule,
dominion_, Æ.

fadur (A) = fæder

fæc (e) n. _space of time, while, division, interval_, _Lk_; Æ, CP:
_period of five years, lustrum_, WW 431^16. ['_fec_'; _Ger._ fach]

fæccan = feccan

fæcele (e^1) f. _torch_, WW. [_Ger._ fackel]

f¯æcenlîce = fâcenlîce

fæcful _spacious_, #Sc# 185^5.

fæcile (#Gl#) = fæcele

f¯æcne I. _deceitful, treacherous_, _Ps_: _vile, worthless_. II. adv.
_deceitfully, maliciously, disgracefully_: (¶) _exceedingly_.
['_faken_']

f¯æcnig '_dolosus_?' #RPs# 72^18 (or ? f¯æcnigung '_dolus_,' ES 38·13).

+fæd _orderly, well-conducted_, LL: _calm, composed_, W 51^24. [fadian]

f¯æd- = fêd-

fæder (e^1) m. usu. indecl. in sg. '_father_,' _Æ, VPs_; AO, CP: _male
ancestor_, _LkL, Mt_: _the Father, God_, _Jn, Mt, VPs_: (in pl.)
_parents_, Æ. eald f. _grandfather_. ðridda, fêowerða f. etc.
_great-grandfather, great-great-grandfather_, _etc._

fædera (e^1) m. _paternal uncle_, AO. [cp. _Ger._ vetter]

+fædera m. _godfather (in his relation to the father)_, Æ. [_Ger._
gevatter]

fæderæðelo ¶ npl. _patrimony_: _paternal kinship_.

fæderen _paternal_.

+fæderen _born of the same father_, AO 114^14.

fæderenbrôðor m. _brother (from the same father)_.

fæderencnôsl (fædren-) n. _father's kin_, LL 54[9].

fæderencynn n. _father's kin_.

fæderenhealf f. _father's side_, #Chr# 887#a#.

fæderenm¯æg m. _paternal kinsman_, #Chr# 887#e#.

fæderenm¯ægð f. _paternal kindred_, LL 392[3].

fæderêðel m. _fatherland_, AO.

fæderfeoh n. _dowry paid by the father of the bride_, LL.

fædergeard m. _father's dwelling_, #Gen# 1053.

fædergestrêon n. _patrimony_, #Gl#.

fæderhîwisc n? '_paterfamilias_,' NG.

fæderingm¯æg = fæderenm¯æg

fæderland n. _paternal land, inheritance_, #Chr# 1101.

fæderlêas _fatherless_, W.

fæderlic _'fatherly,' paternal, ancestral_, _El_. adv. -lîce.

+fædlic _fit, suitable, proper_. adv. -lîce: _orderly, quietly_:
_craftily_, #CPs# 82^4. [fadian]

fædern- = fæderen-

fæderslaga m. _parricide_, WW.

fæderswica m. _traitor to one's father_, ÆL 19^224.

fædm = fæðm

fædr- = fæder-

+fædrian _to have the same father_, AO.

f¯æfne (LkR 1^29) = f¯æmne

+fæg _beloved_, B 915. [_OHG._ gifag]

-f¯ægan v. â-f.

f¯æge _'fey,' doomed (to death)_, _fated, destined_, _An, B, Ma_: _dead_:
_unhappy, accursed_, _Cr_: _feeble, cowardly_, _Gu_. [_Ger._ feige]

±fægen (w. g.) _'fain,' glad, joyful, rejoicing_, _B, Bo_; AO.

fægenian = fægnian

fægennes f. _joy_, NC 285.

fæger (¯æ) I. _'fair,' lovely, beautiful_, _Bo, Gen_; AO, CP: _pleasant,
agreeable_, _Ex_: _attractive_, _Gen_; Æ. II. f. _beauty_, _Bo_.

fæger- = fægr-

fægerlîce _splendidly_, LkL 16^19.

fægernes f. _'fairness,' beauty_, _LPs, Sc_; Æ.

fægerwyrde _smooth-speaking_, FT 12.

fægn = fægen

fægnes f. _diversity_, #LPs# 44^15.

±fægnian (a) (w. g. etc.) _to rejoice, be glad, exult_, _Bo, Met_:
_fawn_, Æ: _applaud_. ['_fain_']

±fægnung f. _rejoicing_, #ELSPs#.

+f¯ægon pret. pl. of +fêon.

fægre (¯æ) _fairly, elegantly, beautifully_, _Æ_: _pleasantly, softly,
gently, kindly_, _Gen, Men_: _well, justly_: _early_, LkR 24^1 (e).
['_fair_']

±fægrian _to become beautiful_: _adorn, decorate_.

f¯ægð? f. _imminent death_, #An# 284 (GK).

f¯æhan = fêgan II.

fæht = feoht

f¯æhð f. _hostility, enmity, violence, revenge, vendetta_, AO. [fâh; cp.
_Ger._ fehde]

f¯æhðbôt f. _payment for engaging in a feud_, LL 266[25]; 286[5,2d].

f¯æhðe, f¯æhðo, f¯æhðu = f¯æhð

fæl- = feal-, fel-, fyl-

f¯æl¯æcan = fâl¯æcan

f¯æle ¶ I. _faithful, trusty, good_, _Ps_: _dear, beloved_. ['_fele_']
II. adv. _truly, well, pleasantly_.

±f¯ælsian _to expiate, condition, cleanse, purify_: (+) _pass through_.

f¯æman _to 'foam,'_ _MkL_. [fâm]

f¯æmhâdlic = f¯æmnhâdlic

f¯æmig = fâmig

f¯æmnanhâd = f¯æmnhâd

f¯æmne (ê) f. _maid, virgin, bride_, Æ: (+) _woman_: _virago_.

f¯æmne(n)dlic (GD) = f¯æmnhâdlic

f¯æmnhâd m. _virginity, maidenhood_, AO.

f¯æmnhâdesmon m. _virgin_, RB 136^24.

f¯æmnhâdlic (OEG), f¯æmn(en)lic _maidenly, virginal_.

fæn == fen

fær I. n. (? also f.) nap. faru (±) _way, journey, passage, expedition_,
_A, Lk_. mannes f. _highway_, ÆL 25^441: _proceedings, life_, Æ:
_movable possessions, means of subsistence_, HL: _ark, ship_. ['_fare_']
II. _aspect_? #Met# 31^4.

f¯ær (ê) I. m. _sudden danger, peril_, _B, Ex_: _sudden attack_:
_marvel_? #Bl# 199^24. ['_fear_'] II. = fêfer. III. = fæger

fær- = far-, fer-, fear-, feor-, fier-, for-

f¯ær- prefix = (1) _sudden, fearful_; (2) fêr-

f¯ærærning f. _quick marching_, GD 14^24.

f¯æran _to frighten_, _Æ_; CP: _raven_, MtL 7^15 (ê). ['_fear_']

f¯ærbena m. _peasant, small-holder_? (Lieb.), LL 383[50].

f¯ærbifongen _beset by dangers_, B 2009.

f¯ærbl¯æd (ê^1) m. _sudden blast (of wind)_, #Jul# 649.

f¯ærbryne m. _scorching heat_, #Ex# 72.

f¯ærclamm (ê) m. _sudden seizure_, #Ex# 119.

f¯ærcoðu f. _apoplexy_, #Lcd#.

f¯ærcwealm m. _sudden pestilence_.

f¯ærcyle m. _intense cold_, #Gen# 43.

f¯ærdêað m. _sudden death_, WW 351^19.

f¯ærdryre m. _sudden fall_, #Cra# 48.

f¯æredlic (Æ) = f¯ærlic

færeht = færriht

færeld (a^1) nm. _way, journey, passage, expedition_, Æ, AO, CP:
_retinue, company_, AO: _course of life, conduct_, Æ: _progress, power
of locomotion_, Æ: _the Passover_.

færeldfrêols m. _passover feast_.

færelt (AO, CP) = færeld

færennes = færnes

færeð pres. 3 sg. of faran.

færfrîg _without passage-money_, #Kl#.

f¯ærfyll (on) _headlong_, WW 426^8.

f¯ærgripe ¶ m. _sudden grip_.

f¯ærgryre ¶ m. _awful horror_.

f¯ærhaga m. _hedge of terrors_, #Gu# 933.

f¯æringa (ê) _suddenly, unexpectedly, quickly, forthwith, by chance_,
_Lk_; Æ, CP. ['_feringe_']

f¯ærlic _sudden, unexpected_, _AO, WW_; Æ, CP. adv. -lîce, _Lk_.
['_ferly_']

færnes f. _passage, traffic_, BH, MtR.

f¯ærnîð m. _hostile attack_, B 476.

f¯ærr¯æs m. _sudden rush_, LkL 8^33.

f¯ærr¯æsende (ê^1) '_repentia_,' DR 125^16.

færriht n. _passage-money_, ÆL 23b^352.

færsceatt m. _passage-money, fare_, #Andr#.

f¯ærsceaða m. _enemy_, #Ma# 142.

f¯ærscyte m. _sudden shot_, #Cr# 766.

f¯ærsearo n. _sudden artifice_, #Cr# 770.

f¯ærsêað m. _deep pit_, WW 193^6.

f¯ærslide m. _sudden fall_, #PPs# 114^8.

f¯ærspell ¶ n. _dreadful tidings_.

færst pres. 2 sg. of faran.

f¯ærstice m. _sudden stitch (pain)_.

f¯ærstylt m? _amazement_, LkL 5^26.

f¯ærswîge f. _amazement_, MkL 5^42 (ê).

færð I. = ferð. II. = pres. 3 sg. of faran.

f¯ærunga, f¯ærunge (Æ) = f¯æringa

f¯æruntrymnes f. _sudden sickness_, #Lcd# 107b.

f¯ærwundor n. _terrible wonder_, #Ex# 279.

fæs (a, ea) n. _fringe, border_, _MtL_. ['_fas_']

f¯æsceaftnes = fêasceaftnes

fæsl ¶ n? _seed, offspring, progeny_.

fæsnian = fæstnian

fæst I. _'fast,' fixed, firm, secure, steadfast, strong_, _BH, Bo, Lcd_:
_stiff, heavy, dense_, _Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP: _made strong, fortified_, _BH_;
Æ: _religious, Christian (book)_. II. (#Gu# 192) = fæsten

±fæstan _to fasten, make firm, ratify, establish_, _MkL, LkL_: _entrust,
commit_: _'fast' ('i-fast'), abstain from food_, _A, Bl, Lcd_; CP:
_atone for (by fasting)_, #Da# 592.

fæste (e) _'fast,' firmly, securely_, _BH, Bo_; Æ: _straitly, strictly_:
_heavily (sleep)_.

fæsten n. _fastness, stronghold, fortress_, AO, CP: _cloister_, Æ: (±)
_fast (abstinence from food) Bl, LL, Mt, VPs_; CP: _firmament, sky_.
['_fasten_']

fæstenbehæfednes f. _parsimony_, WW 504^10.

fæstenbryce m. _breach of fast_, LL, W.

fæstendæg m. _fast-day_, RB, W.

fæstendîc m. _fort-ditch, moat_, Ct.

fæstengangol = fæstgangol

fæstengeat n. _castle-gate_, #Jud# 162.

fæstengeweorc n. _liability for repair of the defences of a town_.

fæst-enlic, -ernlic _quadragesimal_, DR.

fæstennes = fæstnes

fæstentîd f. _fast_, LL.

fæstenwuce f. _week of fasting_, ÆL 23b^111.

f¯æstermôdor = fôstormôdor

fæstern n. _fast_: _Quadragesima_, LG.

fæstes _by chance_, WW.

fæstgangol (o^2, e^3) _steady, faithful_, #Cra# 80.

fæsthafol _retentive, tenacious_, Æ: _sparing, miserly_, CP.

fæsthafolnes f. _economy_, CP 453^28.

fæstheald _firmly fixed_, ÆL 23^423.

fæsthýdig ¶ _constant, steadfast_.

±fæstian (ea) _to commend, entrust, commit_, LkL.

fæsting f. _commendation, trust, guardianship_, GD 239^15; LL 58[7].

fæstingan = fæstnian

fæstingmann m. _a kind of retainer_, EC.

fæstlic _firm, fixed, steadfast, resolute_. adv. -lîce (+ in AS)
_fixedly, steadily, constantly_, _Bo_: _unceasingly_, _Æ, Bl_: _verily,
but_, NG. ['_fastly_']

fæstmôd _constant in mind_, AO 288^17.

fæstnes f. _firmness, massiveness, stability_, _Bo_: _'fastness,'
stronghold_, Æ: _firmament_, Æ.

fæstnian _to 'fasten,' fix, secure, bind_, _An_: _confirm, ratify,
conclude (peace)_, _Ma, OET_: _betroth_.

±fæstnung f. _fastening, bond_: _security, safety_: _protection,
shelter_: _ratification, pledge, engagement_: _exhortation_, MkL p2^5:
_monument_, MtL p5^4; Mk 5^5.

fæstr¯æd _firm, constant, steadfast_, _B, Bo_; CP, Æ. ['_fastrede_']

fæstr¯ædlic _constant, steadfast_, #Bo# 20^21. adv. -lîce.

fæstr¯ædnes f. _constancy, fortitude_, #Bo#.

fæststeall _standing firmly_.

fæsð = fæst

fæt n. nap. fatu _vat, vessel, jar, cup_, _Æ, B, JnL_; AO, CP: _casket_,
#El# 1026. ['_fat_']

f¯æt I. ¶ n. _plate, beaten out metal (especially gold)_, _gold
ornament_. II. = f¯ætt I.

±f¯ætan _to cram, put (in)_, _load_, CP.

f¯æted I. ¶ _ornamented with gold_. [cp. _Goth._ fêtjan] II. = f¯ætt

f¯ætedhlêor _with cheek ornaments_, B 1026.

f¯ætedsinc n. _beaten gold_, #An# 478.

f¯ætels, f¯ætel m. _vessel_, _AO, Lcd_; Æ: _pouch, bag, sack_, Æ, CP.
['_fetles_']

fætelsian = fetelsian

f¯ætelsian _to put into a vessel_.

fætfyllere (e^2) m. _cupbearer_, GD.

f¯ætgold n. _beaten gold_, B 1921.

f¯æthengest m. _riding horse_, #Rd# 23^14.

fætian = fetian

f¯ætnes f. '_fatness_,' _Ps_; Æ, CP: _the richest part of anything_,
_Ps_.

+f¯ætnian = +f¯ættian

f¯ætt I. (ê) _fat, fatted_, _Æ, AO, Lk_. II. = f¯æted

f¯ættian (+) _to become fat_, _Ps_: (+) _anoint_, _Ps_: _fatten_.
['_fat_']

+fættig _fat, rich_, #CPs# 19^4.

f¯æðe = fêðe

fæðelas '_histriones_'? v. OEG 39^2.

fæðer = feðer

fæðm (e) mf. _outstretched or encircling arms, embrace, grasp_, _An,
Rd_: _protection_: _interior, bosom, lap, breast, womb_: _'fathom,'
cubit_, _Æ, Cp, WW_; Æ: _power_, _B, Cr_: _expanse, surface_.

fæðman, fæðmian _to surround, envelop, clasp, embrace_, _An, B_.
['_fathom_']

fæðmlic _embracing, enclosing_, WW 486^6.

-fæðmnes v. on-f.

fæðmrîm n. _fathom, cubit_, #Ph# 29.

fæx = feax

fæxnes = feaxnes

fæxtælg? m. _pomade_, Cp 379#f#? (v. AB 6·163).

fâg I. _variegated, spotted, dappled, stained, dyed_, _Lcd_: _shining,
gleaming_, _Ps_. ['_faw_'] II. = fâh I.

fâg- = fâh-

fage f. (WW 94) = facg

fagen = fægen

fagen- = fægn-

fâgettan _to change colour_, #Lcd# 3·240^23. mid wordum f. _speak
evasively_.

fâgetung f. _change_, ÆH 2·538^33.

±fâgian _to change, vary in colour_: _embroider_, RB 137^8.

fâgnes f. _scab, ulcer, eruption_, Æ: _various colours, brilliancy_, HL:
'_qualitas_,' '_varietas_,' OEG.

fagnian = fægnian

fâgung f. _variety_, DR, GD.

fâgwyrm m. _basilisk_, #VPs# 90^13.

fâh I. nap. fâ _hostile_, _B_: (±) _proscribed, outlawed, guilty,
criminal_, _B_. [_'foe_'; fêogan] II. (±) m. '_foe,' enemy_, _LL_; Æ,
AO. III. == fâg I.

fahame (= fêa-, fêorh-hama?) _womb_, WW 40^28.

±fâhmann m. '_foeman_,' LL 50[5].

fahnian = fægnian

fala I. (WW 52^11) ?d. of *fealh _tube, pipe_ (ES 38·337). II. = fela

fâl¯æcan _to be at enmity with, show hostility to_, LL 160[20,7].

fal-d, -æd, -od, -ud m. _'fold,' stall, stable, cattle-pen_, _A, Gl,
Jn_.

fald- (N) = feald-

faldgang m. _going to the (sheep-) fold_, W 170^20#e#.

faldhrîðer n. _stalled ox_, MF 158.

faldian _to make a fold, hurdle off sheep_, _LL_ 454[9]. ['_fold_']

falew- = feal(e)w-

fall- (#VPs#; NG) = feall-

falod = fald

fals I. adj. _false_, W 272^4. II. n. _falsehood, fraud, counterfeit_.
[late; from _L._]

falðing _mass, load_, WW 33^8.

falu = fealu

falud = fald

fâm n. '_foam_,' _BH, Ep_; Æ.

fâmbig = fâmig

fâmblâwende v. lîg-f.

fâmgian _to foam, boil_, #Ex# 481.

fâmig (¯æ) '_foamy_,' _Rd_.

fâmigbord _with foaming banks (of a stream)_, #Met# 26^26.

fâmigbôsm _with foamy bosom_, #Ex# 493.

fâmigheals ¶ _foamy-necked_.

fana m. _banner, standard_, _Met_; OEG. ['_fane_'; _Ger._ fahne]

+fâna gp. of +fâ.

fanbyrde _standard-bearing_, v. OEG 1744.

fand pret. 3 sg. of findan.

fandere m. _tempter_, #Sc# 206^4.

±fandian (often w. g., but also d. and a.) _to try, attempt, tempt,
test, examine, explore, search out_, _AO, Gen, Mk, Run_; CP. ['_fand_,'
'_fond_'; findan]

fandung f. _investigation, trial, temptation, test, proof_, Æ, CP.

fane I. f. (NG, o^1) = fann. II. = fanu

fang m. _plunder, booty_, #Chr# 1016. [fôn]

fangen pp. of fôn.

+fangian _to join, fasten_, #Bo# 96^14.

fann f. _winnowing, 'fan,'_ _Cp, Lk, LL_. [_L._ vannus]

fannian _to 'fan,'_ _Sc_ 1861^17.

fant (o) m. '_font_,' _Æ_: _baptismal water_, HL 15^293.

fantbæð n. _baptismal water, laver of baptism_, Æ.

fantbletsung f. _consecration of water for baptism_, ÆP 188^12.

fantfæt n. _baptismal font_, Æ.

fanthâlgung (o) f. _consecration at the font_, W 36^2.

fanthâlig _holy from connection with the font_, #Lcd# 140b.

fantwæter n. _'font-water,' water used at baptism, laver of baptism_,
_Lcd_ (o); Æ.

fanu f. _standard_: _iris (plant)_.

fâra gp. of fâh I.

+fara m. _travelling companion, comrade_.

±faran^6 _to set forth, go, travel, wander, proceed_, _Bl, Gen, JnL_;
AO, CP: _be, happen, exist, act, 'fare' ('i-fare'), get on, undergo,
suffer_, _Æ_: (+) _die_, AO, CP: (+) _attack, overcome, capture,
obtain_, AO.

farað- = faroð-

fareld = færeld

fareð- = faroð-

Fariseisc _of or belonging to the Pharisees_, OEG, WG.

farm = feorm

faroð ¶ m. _shore_: _stream_.

faroðhengest (ea^1) m. _sea-horse, ship_, #El# 226.

faroðlâcende ¶ _swimming, sailing_. as sb. _sailors_.

faroðrîdende _sailing_, #An# 440.

faroðstr¯æt ¶ f. _path of the sea_.

faru f. _way, going, journey, course_, Æ: _expedition, march_:
_procession, retinue, companions_: _life, proceedings, adventures_, Æ:
_movable possessions_.

fas- = fæs-

fatian (NG) = fetian

fatu v. fæt.

faðe, faðu f. _father's sister, paternal aunt_.

faðusunu m. _father's sister's son_, #Chr# 1119.

faul m? _evil spirit_, #Lcd# 43a.

fêa I. (±) m. _joy_, AO, CP. II. n. = feoh. III. (fêawa) adj. nap.
fêawe, superl. fêawost, fêast '_few_,' _B, BH, Chr, Mt_. fêawum sîðum
_seldom_. adv. _even a little, at all_.

feadur (A) = fæder

+fêagan (NG) = +fêon

feah = feoh

±feaht I. pret. 3 sg. of feohtan. II. = feoht

feal- = fel-

+feald n. _region, abode_? #Wald# 2^10.

±fealdan^7 _to 'fold,' wrap up, furl_, _Æ, Bo, Rd_.

fealdestôl (y) m. _folding-stool_.

feale, fealewes v. fealu.

fealewian = fealwian

fealfor = felofor  [[under "felofearð"]]

fealg pret. 3 sg. of fêolan.

fealga v. fealh.

fealgian _to fallow_, LL 454[9] (v. A 36·71).

fealh I. f. nap. fealga _fallow_. [_Ger._ falge] II. (e) f. _'felloe,'
felly (of a wheel)_, _Bo_. III. pret. 3 sg. of fêolan. IV. v. fala.

+fêalic _joyous, pleasant_. adv. -lîce _joyously_, W 284^16.

feall = fiell

feallan^7 (±) _to 'fall' ('i-falle'), fall headlong, fail, decay, die_,
_B, Ps_; AO, CP. on f. _fall on, attack_: _flow_, AO 19^18: (+)
_overthrow_, DR 115^6 (æ).

fealle f. _snare, trap_, OEG.

feall-endlic, -enlic _unstable, perishable, transient_, #Bl#, W.

fealletian '_concidere_,' MkLR 5^5 (a^1).

-feallung v. feax-f.

+fealnis f. _ruin_, LkL 2^34 (æ).

fealo = (1) fealu; (2) fela

fêalôg w. g. _destitute_, #Gu# 217.

fealohilte _yellow-hilted_, #Ma# 166.

fealu I. (feale) adj. gsm. feal(e)wes, fealuwes _fallow, yellow, tawny,
dun-coloured, grey, dusky, dark_, Æ. [_Ger._ fahl] II. n. _fallow
ground_, E 179´.

fealuwian = fealwian

fealwes v. fealu.

fealwian _to become 'fallow,' fade, wither_, _Sol_: _grow yellow,
ripen_.

fêanes f. _'fewness,' paucity_, _BH, Ps_.

fear = fearr

fêar = fearh

fêara gen. of fêa.

fearh (æ, e) m. gs. fêares _little pig, hog_, #Gl#. [cp. _Ger._ ferkel]

fearhhama m. _little stem_, WW 161^5.

fearhrýðer n. _bull_, #Bl#. [fearr]

+fearhsugu f. _sow in farrow_, WW.

fearlic _of a bull_, OEG 11^187.

fêarlic = f¯ærlic

fearm m. _freight, cargo_, #Gen# 1394.

fearn n. '_fern_,' _Bo, Cp_; Æ; Mdf.

fearnbed n. _fern-bed_, BC, WW.

fearoð- = faroð-

fearr I. m. _beast of burden, ox, bull_, Æ, AO. II. == feorr

feas (#VPs#) = fæs

fêasceaft ¶ _destitute, miserable, helpless, poor_.

fêasceaftig _destitute, poor_, #Seaf# 26.

fêasceaftnes (¯æ^1) f. _poverty_, OEG 1171.

feast- = fæst-

featu (#VPs#) = fatu nap. of fæt.

fêaw- = fêa-

fêawa = fêa

fêawlic _few_, #EPs# 104^12.

fêawnes f. _fewness, paucity_.

feax (æ, e) n. _hair, head of hair_, _B, BH, Lcd_; Æ, CP. ['_fax_']

feaxclâð n. _cap_.

+feaxe _furnished with hair_, BH 96^11.

feaxeacan pl. _forelocks_, WW 343^33.

feaxede _long-haired (of a comet)_, _Chr_ 892. ['_faxed_']

+feaxen (#Nar# 37^1) = +feaxe

feaxfang m. _seizing or dragging by the hair_, LL 5[33].

feaxfeallung f. _shedding of hair, mange_, WW 113^30.

feaxhâr _hoary, gray-haired_, #Rd# 73^1.

feaxn¯ædel f. _crisping-pin_, WW 108^2.

feaxnes (æ, e) f. _head of hair_.

feaxnett n. _hair-net_, WW.

+feaxod = +feaxe

feaxprêon m. _hair-pin_, WW 107^38.

feaxsceacga m. _bunch of hair_.

feaxsceacgede _shaggy_.

feaxsceara (e^1) fp. _scissors for hair-cutting_? _curling-tongs_? WW
241^41.

feaxtælg? v. fæxtælg.

feaxwund f. _wound under the hair_, LL 20[45].

feb- = fef-

fec = fæc

±feccan (æ) _to 'fetch,' bring, bring to, draw_, _Æ, Mt_: _seek_: _gain,
take_. [= fetian]

fecele = fæcele

fecgan = feccan

fêdan _to 'feed,' nourish, sustain, foster, bring up_, _Bl, Mt, Ps_; Æ,
CP: _bear, bring forth, produce_. [fôda]

fêdednes = fêdnes

fêdelfugol (oe^1) m. _fatted bird_, MtR 22^4.

fêd-els, -esl m. _feeding, keep_: _fatted animal_ (_bird_?), _WW_; Cp.
['_feddle_']

fêdelsswîn _fattened pig_, NC 343.

feder = fæder

federa = fædera

fêding f. '_feeding_,' _CP_.

fêdnes (¯æ) f. _nourishment_, BH 88^6.

fedra = fædera

fêfer mn. gs. fêfres '_fever_,' _Lk, G_; CP.

fêferâdl f. '_fever_,' AO.

fêferfûge f. _feverfew_. [_L._ febrifugia]

fêfersêoc _feverish_, WW 405^34.

fêfor, fêfur = fêfer

fêfrian _to be feverish, suffer from fever_, #Lcd#.

fêfrig _feverish_.

+fêg n. _joining, joint_, Æ: _composition_. [_Ger._ gefüge]

fêgan I. (±) _to join, unite, fix, adapt_, _Lcd, Rd_; Æ, CP. ['_fay_';
_Ger._ fügen] II. _to paint_, WW.

+fêgednes f. _conjunction, connection_: _bond, fetter_, DHy 5^6.

feger = fæger

fegere = fægre

±fêging f. _conjunction_, #ÆGr# 10^8.

+fêgnes f. _association, companionship_.

feh = feoh

+feh = +feah pret. 3 sg. of +fêon.

feht _sheepskin with the fleece on it_? TC 119; v. ES 37·177.

+feht = +feoht

fehtan (N) = feohtan

fêhð pres. 3 sg. of fôn.

fel = fell

fêl = fêol

fela (ea, eo) I. sbn. and adj. (w. g., or in agmt.; rarely inflected)
_many, much_, _B, G, Lcd_, _etc._ II. adv. _very much, many_. ['_fele_';
_Ger._ viel]

fela¯æte '_mordax_,' OEG 23^15.

felaf¯æcne _very treacherous_, #GnE# 148.

felafeald _manifold, many times over_, _Ps_. ['_felefold_']

felafealdnes (fele-) f. _multitude_, #EPs# 5^11.

felafrêcne ¶ _very fierce, bold_.

felagêomor ¶ _very sad, sorrowful_.

felageong _very young_, FT 53.

felageonge _having travelled much_, #Creat# 3. [gangan]

felahrôr _full of exploits_, B 27.

felaîdelspr¯æce _emptily chattering_, CP 174^25.

felalêof _very dear_, #Wif# 26.

fela-meahtig, -mihtig ¶ _most mighty_.

felamôdig ¶ _very bold_.

±fêlan I. (w. g.) _to touch, 'feel,'_ _AO_: _perceive_, _Rd_. II.
(#VPs#) = fêolan

felaspecol _talkative_.

fela-specolnes, -sprecolnes f. _loquacity, talkativeness_.

felaspr¯æce _talkative_, CP 281^14.

felasynnig _very guilty_, B 1379.

felawlonc _very stately_, #Rd# 13^7.

felawyrde _talkative_, W 40^18.

felawyrdnes f. _talkativeness_.

felcyrf n. _foreskin_.

feld m. ds. felda, felde _open or cultivated land, field, plain_, _A,
Met, RB_; AO, CP; Mdf: _battle-field_. on cl¯ænum felda _in the open
field (of battle)_, CP 227^25.

feldælbin (WW 352^10) = feldelfen

feldbêo f. _humble bee_, WW.

feldbisceopwyrt f. _field bishopwort_, ANS 84·325.

feldcirice f. _country church_, LL 264[5,1]; 282[3,2].

felde = fylde pret. 3 sg. of fyllan.

feldelfen f. _wood-nymph_, WW 189^6.

feldgangende ¶ _roaming over the land_.

feldhrîðer n. _field-ox_, NC 285.

feldhûs ¶ n. _tent_, #Ex#.

feldland n. _'field-land,' meadow-land, plain_, _Æ_.

feldlic _rural_, Æ.

feldmædere f. _field-madder, rosemary_, WW 300^10.

feldminte f. _field-mint, wild mint_, WW.

feld-more, -moru f. _parsnip_.

feldoxa f. _field-ox_ (i.e. an ox out to grass, not a stalled or
fat ox).

feldrude f. _wild rue_.

feldsæten f. _field_, #LPs# 77^12. [seten]

feldswamm m. _fungus, toadstool_, WW 404^26.

feldwêsten n. _desert_.

feldwôp m. _plantain_, #Gl# (?= *feldhoppe, ANS 119·435; FM 200).

feldwyrt f. _gentian_, #Lcd#.

+fêle _sensitive_, #Lcd#.

felefeald = felafeald

fêlelêas _insensible, dead_, #Wy# 40.

felg, felge f. _'felloe,' felly, rim of a wheel_, _Bo_. [fêolan]

felge-role, -roðe '_polipodium_,' A 24·432 (v. MLN 23·186).

felh = fealh pret. 3 sg. of fêolan.

felhð (#KGl#) = fylgð pres. 3 sg. of fylgan.

feligean = fylgan

fell I. n. _'fell,' skin, hide_, _B, Jul, Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP. [_L._ pellis]
II. m. = fiell

fell- = fyll-

fellen (i^1) _made of skins_, Æ.

fellerêad (êo^3; = *pællerêad? ES 43·315) _purple_, NG.

fêllun = fêollon pret. pl. of feallan.

-felma v. ¯æger-f.

felmen- = fylmen-

±fêlnes f. _sensation, feeling_, Æ.

felo- = fela-

felofearð, felofor m. _name of a bird, bittern_? JGPh 2^176.

fêlon (A) = fulgon pret. pl. of fêolan.

+fêlsian = +f¯ælsian

felst pres. 2 sg. of feallan.

felstycce n. _piece of skin_, #Lcd# 1·330.

felt m? n? '_felt_,' _WW_.

felt-ere, -erre _a plant_, #Lcd#.

feltûn m. _privy, dunghill_, CP.

feltûngrêp f. _dunghill_, NC 285.

feltwurma m. _wild marjoram_, #Lcd#.

feltwyrt f. _mullein (plant)_.

felð = fielð pres. 3 sg. of feallan.

fêlð = fýlð

felða (Cp 128#s#) rare gp. of feld.

felu- = felo-

fêm-, fêmn- (#VPs#) = f¯æmn-

fen = fenn

fenampre (o^2) f. _a marsh plant_, #Lcd# 38b.

fencerse f. _water-cress_, _Lcd_. ['_fencress_']

fenester n? m? _window_, GD 220. [_L._]

fenfearn n. _marsh-fern_, _'salvia,' water-fern_, WW 135^4.

fenfreoðo f. _fen-refuge_, B 851.

fenfugol m. _moor-fowl_, #Lcd# 95b?

±feng m. _grip, grasp, embrace_: _capture_: _prey, booty_. [fôn]

fêng pret. 3 sg. of fôn.

fengel ¶ m. _lord, prince, king_.

fengelâd n. _marsh-path, fen_, B 1359.

fengnes f. '_susceptio_,' #CPs# 82^9.

fengnett n. (_catching-_)_net_, #PPs# 140^12.

fengon pret. pl. of fôn.

fengtôð (æ) m. _canine tooth_, LL 81n16.

fenhleoðu np. _fen-coverts_, B 820. [hlið]

fenhop n. _fen-hollow_, B 764.

fenix m. _the bird 'ph[oe]nix,'_ _ÆGr, Ph_: _date-palm_.

fenland n. _fen-land, marsh_, AO.

fenlic _marshy_, _Æ, Guth_. ['_fenlich_']

fenminte f. _water-mint_, #Lcd# 14b.

fenn nm. _mud, mire, dirt_, _CP, WW_: _'fen,' marsh, moor_, _B, Bo_; AO:
_the fen country_, _Chr_ 905.

fenn- = fen-

fennig _dirty, musty, mouldy_, _CP_ (= fynig): _marshy_, _WW_.
['_fenny_']

fennðæc n. _fen-covering_, OET (Bd^2).

fenol = finul

fenompre = fenampre

fenýce f. _marsh-frog_, #Rd# 41^71.

fêo == feoh; also ds. of feoh.

fêode pret. 3 sg. of fêogan.

fêogan (fîa, N; fêon) _to hate, persecute_, _LkL_. ['_ivee_']

fêogýtsung (êa) f. _avarice_, BH 130^34.

feoh n. gs. fêos, ds. fêo _cattle, herd_, _LL, Sol_; AO [_Ger._ vieh]:
_movable goods, property_, _Bo, Ps_; AO: _money, riches, treasure_, _BH,
Mt_; Æ, CP. wið licgendum fêo _for ready money_, ÆL 9^54: _name of the
rune for =f=_. ['_fee_']

feohbehât n. _promise of money_, #Chr# 865#e#.

feohbîgenga m. _cattle-keeper_, NC 343.

feohbôt f. _money compensation_, LL 46n5; 258[51].

feohfang m. _offence of taking a bribe_, LL 318[15,1].

feohgafol n. _usury_, NC 285.

feohgehât n. _promise of money_, #Chr# 865#a#.

feohgerêfa m. _steward_, LkLR 12^42.

feohgesceot n. _payment of money_, #Bk# 28; 29.

feohgesteald n. _possession of riches_, #Jul# 685.

feohgestrêon n. _acquiring money_: _treasure, possessions, riches_.

feohgîdsere (CP) = feohgîtsere

feohgiefu f. _largess_.

feohgîetsere (CP 331^6) = feohgîtsere

feohgîfre ¶ _avaricious_.

feohgift ¶ f. _bounty-giving, largess_.

feohgîtsere m. _miser_.

feohgod n. _property (in cattle)_, LL 60n1.

feohgyrnes f. _greed_, LL 396[4].

feohhord m. _treasury_.

feohhûs n. _treasure-house_, _WW_. ['_fee_']

feohl¯ænung f. _lending of money_, WW 115^45.

feohland '_pascua_,' #PPs#.

feohlêas _without money_: _not to be bought off, past compensation_, B
2441.

feohlêasnes f. _want of money_.

feohsceatt n. _money-payment_, #Da# 744.

feohspêda fp. _riches_, GD 273^2.

feohspilling f. _waste of money_, #Chr# 1096.

feohstrang _well off_, #Gl#.

±feoht (i, o, y) n. _action of fighting_, _B, Ps_: _'fight,' battle_,
_AO_: _strife_, _Mod_.

±feohtan^3 (e, N) _to 'fight,' combat, strive_, _Chr, LL_, Æ, AO, CP.
on f. _attack, fight against_: (+) _gain by fighting, win_.

+feohtdæg m. _day of battle_, #PPs# 139^7.

feohte f. = feoht

feohtehorn (y^1) m. _battle-horn_, #PPs# 74^9.

feohtend m. _fighter_, OEG 3805.

feohtere m. _fighter_, ES 39^328.

feohtgegyrela m. _implement of war, missile, 'falarica,'_ WW 399^30.

feohtlâc n. _fighting_, _LL_. ['_fightlac_']

feohtling (y^1) m. _fighter_, GD 110^13; MP 1·610.

+fêohtsumnes f. _joyfulness_, NC 292. [+fêon]

feohtwîte (i^1, y^1, y^2) n. _penalty for fighting_, LL.

feohwite n. _fine for coining false money_, LL 319 col. 2.

fêol pret. 3 sg. of feallan.

fêol (ê, î) f. '_file_,' _Rd_; ÆL.

feola = fela

fêolaga m. _partner, 'fellow,'_ _Chr_ 1016#d#. [_ON._ fêlage]

±fêolan^3 (ê) _to cleave, be joined to, adhere_: _enter, penetrate, pass
into, through or over, betake oneself to_, #Chr#: _undergo_: _persevere
in_. [_Goth._ filhan]

fêold pret. 3 sg. of fealdan.

feolde = folde

fêoldon pret. pl. of fealdan.

fêolheard _hard as a file_? _hard enough to resist the file_? #Ma# 108
(or ?= *felaheard).

fêolian _to file_, ÆL 32^203.

fêoll pret. 3 sg., fêollon pret. pl. of feallan.

feolu = fela

feolu-fer, -ferð, -for = felofor  [[under "felofearð"]]

feon = fenn

fêon I. (±, usu. +) sv^5 w. in or g. _to be glad, rejoice, exult_, CP.
II. = fêogan

fêond (ie, y) m. ds. fîend, fêonde, nap. fîend, fêond, _adversary, foe,
enemy_, _A, B, Mt_; AO, CP [f. = _female enemy_]: _'fiend,' devil_,
_Gu_; CP: _the Devil_, _Lcd, Hy_. [pres. ptc. of fêogan]

fêond¯æt m. _eating things sacrificed to idols_, #PPs# 105^24.

fêondgrâp f. _grip of a foe_, B 636.

fêondgyld n. _idolatry, idol_, GD, #PPs#: _demoniacal possession_?
MtL 4^24.

fêondlic _hateful, hostile, fiendish_, _WW_; Æ. adv. -lîce, _Jul_.
['_fiendly_']

fêondr¯æden f. _enmity_, Æ.

fêondr¯æs m. _hostile attack_, #Gen# 900.

fêondsceaða ¶ m. _enemy, robber_.

fêondscipe m. _hostility, enmity, hatred_, AO, CP.

fêondsêoc _possessed with a devil, demoniac_, BH 184^5.

fêondulf m. _public enemy, criminal, malefactor_. [fêond, wulf]

fêong = fêoung

feonn = fenn

feor = feorr, feorran-

fêor = feorh, fêower

fêora gp. of feorh.

+fêora = +fêra

feorbûend _dwelling far off_, B 254.

feorcumen = feorrancumen

feorcund = feorrancund

feorcýðð f. _distant land_, B 1838.

feord = fierd

feord- = fierd-, fyrd-

fêores gs. of feorh.

feorg == feorh

feorh (e) mn. gs. fêores; nap. feorh _life, principle of life, soul,
spirit_, AO, CP. tô wîdan fêore _for eternity, for ever_. f. gesellan,
âgiefan _to die_: _living being, person_.

feorhâdl f. _fatal disease_, Æ.

feorhbana m. _man-slayer_.

feorhbealu ¶ n. _deadly evil, violent death_.

feorhbenn f. _deadly wound_, B 2740.

feorhberend ¶ m. _living being_.

feorhbold n. _body_, #Rood# 73.

feorhbona = feorhbana

feorhbora m. _life-bearer_, #Rd# 92^2.

feorhcwalu ¶ (e) f. _slaughter, death_.

feorhcwealm ¶ m. _slaughter, death_.

feorhcynn ¶ n. _race of mortals_.

feorhdagas mp. _days of life_, #Gen# 2358.

feorhdolg n. _deadly wound_, #Cr# 1455.

feorhêacen _living_, #Gen# 204.

feorhfægen _fain of life, glad to preserve one's life_, ÆL 23^309.

feorhgebeorh n. _refuge_, #Ex# 369.

feorhgedâl ¶ n. _death_.

feorhgener n. _preservation of life_, LL 204[7,3].

feorhgenîðla ¶ m. _mortal foe_.

feorhgiefa ¶ m. _giver of life_.

feorhgiefu f. _gift of life_, #Rim# 6?

feorh-gôme? f. _means of subsistence_? -gôma? m. _jaw_? #Cr# 1547.

feorhhord ¶ n. _breast, soul, spirit_.

feorhhûs n. _soul-house, body_, #Ma# 297.

feorhhyrde m. _life's guardian, protector_.

feorhlâst m. _step taken to preserve life, flight_, B 846.

feorhlêan n. _revenge for bloodshed_? _gift of life_? #Ex# 150.

feorhlegu ¶ f. _life_.

feorhlic (fera-, ferh-) _vital_, #HGl# 453.

feorhlîf n. _life_, #PPs# 142^2.

feorhloca m. _breast_, #Gu# 625.

feorhlyre m. _loss of life_, LL 466[3].

feorhneru f. _preservation of life, refuge, salvation_: _nourishment of
life, food_.

feorhr¯æd m. _salvation_, #An# 1656.

feorhscyldig _guilty of death_, LL.

feorhsêoc _mortally wounded_, B 820.

feorhsweng m. _fatal blow_, B 2489.

feorhðearf f. _urgent need_, #PPs# 69^1.

feorhwund f. _deadly wound_, B 2385.

feorlen = fyrlen

feorlic _far off, alien, strange_, #Kl# 100^97.

feorlond n. _distant land_, #Pa# 10.

feorm (a, æ, o, y) f. _food, provision, sustenance_: _entertainment,
meal, feast, supper_, Æ, AO, CP: _goods, possessions_: _stores_: _rent
in kind_, EC: _profit, benefit_, _CP_: _tilling_, LL 454, 8 (y).

feorma = forma

feormehâm m. _farm_, #Chr# 1087.

feormend m. _entertainer_: _cleanser, polisher, furbisher_.

feormendlêas _wanting a burnisher_, B 2761.

feormere m. _purveyor_, KC 4·278^21.

feormfultum m. _help in food_, LL 356[69,1].

±feormian _to entertain, receive as guest_: _cherish, support, sustain,
feed_: _consume_: _benefit, profit_: _scour, cleanse, furbish_: (+)
_harbour (stolen goods)_, LL 108[4,6].

feormung f. _harbouring_, LL: _furbishing, cleansing_, LL.

feornes f. _distance_, BH 72^10.

feorr I. comp. fi(e)rra, fyrra; sup. fierresta _'far,' remote, distant_,
_BH, Chr, RB_; CP. II. adv. comp. fierr, firr, fyr(r); sup. fi(e)rrest,
fyrrest _'far,' far away, distant, remote_, CP: _far back (in time)_:
_further, besides, moreover_.

feorran I. adv. _from afar, from a remote time or place_, _B, El, Gen_:
_far off, at a distance_, _Bo_; Æ, CP. ['_ferren_'] II. (æ, y) _to
remove, avert, turn aside, withdraw_, _B_: _proscribe_. ['_far_']

feorrancumen _come from afar, strange_.

feorrancund, feorrcund _come from afar, foreign born_.

feorrane, feorren(e) = feorran I.

feorrfaran^6 '_vexari_,' LkL 7^6 (i^1).

feorrian _to keep apart_, Æ: (+) _depart_, NG (ea).

feorrung f. _removal, departure_, GD 49^16.

feorsian _to go beyond_: _put far from, expel_: _depart, remove,
separate_.

feorsn = fiersn

feorstuð nf. _support_, WW.

feorting f. '_pedatio_,' WW 162^42.

feorð = ferhð

fêorða (êa, N) '_fourth_,' _Lk_; AO, CP. fêorðe healf _three and a
half_.

feorðe _fourthly_, LL 158[15].

fêorð-ling, -ung m. _fourth part_: '_farthing_,' _MkL, LkL_; Æ.
['_ferling_']

fêorum dp. of feorh.

feorweg m. _remote part_.

feorwit = fyrwit

fêos gs. of feoh.

feostnode (#Chr# 963#e#) = fæstnode pret. 3 sg. of fæstnian.

feot- = fet-

fêoð pres. 3 sg. of fêogan.

fêoðer-, fêoðor- = fêower-

fêoung f. _hatred_, CP. [fêogan]

feow-, fêower- v. also fiðer-.

fêower, fêowere [indecl. before a sb. but when alone, usu. g. fêow(e)ra,
d. fêowerum] '_four_,' _Cr_; Æ, AO, CP: _four times_.

fêowerdôgor mn. and adj. _four days_.

fêower-ecge, -ecgede _four-cornered, square_, #Lcd#.

fêowerfeald _fourfold_, Lk 19^8.

fêowerfealdlîce _quadruply_, #Bl#.

fêowerfête _four-footed_, _AO_; Æ. ['_four-foot_']

fêower-fôt, -fôtede _four-footed_.

fêowergild n. _fourfold compensation_, LL 228´.

fêowerhwêolod (fýr-) _four-wheeled_? RHy 4^19. (v. ES 38·15)

fêowerscýte _four-cornered, square_, AO. [scêat]

fêowertême (fêoður-) _four-teamed_, VHy.

fêower-têoða, -têogða, '_fourteenth_,' _BH, MH_; AO.

fêowertîene (ê^3, ý^3) '_fourteen_,' _MtL_; AO.

fêowertig '_forty_,' _MtL_; AO.

fêowertigfeald _fortyfold_.

fêowertiglic _quadragesimal_, BH.

fêowertigoða '_fortieth_,' _Æ_.

fêowertýne = fêowertîene

fêowerða (_Mt_) = fêorða

fêowr- = fêower-, fêor-

fêowra v. fêower.

±fêowung f. _rejoicing, joy_, OEG 1118. [+fêon]

fêowur- = fêower-

fer = fær

fer- = fær-, fear-, fier-, feor-, for-, fyr-

fêr = (1) f¯ær I.; (2) fêfer

fêr- = f¯ær-, fýr

±fêra m. _associate, comrade, fellow-disciple_, AO, CP: _wife_: _man,
servant_, v. LL 2·427f.

fêran _to go, come, set out, march, travel_, _B_; JnL (oe), CP: _behave,
act_: (+) _accomplish, attain, obtain_: (+) _fare, speed, undergo,
suffer_. ['_fere_']

fêrbedd n. _portable bed_.

fêrbl¯æd = f¯ærbl¯æd

fercian _to convey, bring_, _Chr_: _support_, ÆL 23^597: _stuff up (with
lies)_, ÆL 23^713. ['_ferk, firk_']

fercung f. _sustenance, provision, food_, Æ (9^172).

ferdwyrt (ferw-)? _a plant_, ANS 84·325 (or ?= feld-).

fêre _able to go, fit for (military) service_.

+fêre I. f. _company, community_. II. _accessible_, #Ph# 4. [faran]

ferele f. _rod_, GD. [_L._ ferula]

fêrend m. _sailor_: _messenger_.

fereð pres. 3 sg. of (1) faran, (2) ferian.

fêreð pres. 3 sg. of fêran.

fergan = ferian

ferht I. _honest_, #Gl#. II. = ferhð

ferhtlic _just, honest_, #PPs# 95^10.

ferhð ¶ (ferð) mn. _mind, intellect, soul, spirit_: _life_. wîdan f.
_eternally, for ever_.

ferhðbana m. _murderer_, #Ex# 399.

ferhðcearig _of anxious mind_, #Gen# 2217.

ferhð-cleofa, -cofa ¶ m. _breast_.

ferhðfrec _bold, brave_, B 1146.

ferhðfrîðende (rð) _sustaining life_, #Rd# 39^3.

ferhðgenîðla m. _mortal enemy_, B 2881.

ferhðgewit (rð) n. _understanding_, #Cr# 1184.

ferhðglêaw ¶ _wise, prudent_.

ferhðgrim (rð) ¶ _savage_.

ferhðloca ¶ m. _breast, body_.

ferhðlufu f. _heartfelt love_, #An# 83 (y).

ferhðsefa ¶ (i, y) m. _mind, thought_.

ferhðwêrig ¶ _soul-weary, sad_.

±ferian _to carry, convey, bring_, _An, B, El_; Æ: (with refl. a.)
_betake oneself to, be versed in_: _depart, go_, _Ma_. ['_ferry_']

feriend m. _leader, bringer_, #Sol# 80.

fêring I. ¶ f. _journey, wandering_. [fêran] II. f. '_insimulatio_,'
#Gl#. [f¯ær]

+fêrl¯æcan (ê) _to associate, unite_, Æ.

+fêrlic _associated_. adv. -lîce _sociably, together_; -lîðlîce GD
313^24.

±fêrnes f. _passage, transition, passing away_.

+fêrr¯æden (usu. +) f. _companionship, fellowship_, Æ, AO, CP:
_friendship_: _society, fraternity, congregation_, Æ.

fers nm. _verse_: _sentence_. [_L._]

fersc _'fresh' (not salt)_, _AO_: _not salted_, _KC_.

-ferscan v. â-f.

fersceta m. _freshet_, A 20·382.

±fêrscipe m. _fraternity, community, retinue_: _society, fellowship,
companionship_, CP.

+fêrscipian _to unite, accompany_, DR.

fersian _to versify_, #ÆGr# 218^3.

ferð == ferhð

ferða m. _skin, hide_? A 30^253.

ferðan = furðum

fêsan = fýsan

fêsian = fýsian

fest == fæst

fêst = fýst

fester- = fôstor-

festnung f. _munificence_, WW 440^17.

fêstrian = fôstrian

fet pres. 3 sg. of fetian.

fêt I. pres. 3 sg. of fêdan. II. ds. and nap. of fôt.

+fetan^4 _to fall_, MtR 13^7,8.

fetel m. _belt_, _Bo, Met_. ['_fettle_']

fetelhilt n. _belted or ringed sword-hilt_, B 1563.

fêtels = f¯ætels

fetelsian _to provide with a sheath_? BC 3·215^2. +fetelsod
_ornamented_? (BT), _belted_? _ringed_?

feter == fetor

+feterian ¶ _to fetter, bind_.

±fetian (æ) _to bring near, fetch_, _B, Gen_: _bring on, induce_:
_marry_. [= feccan]

fetor (eo^1, e^2) f. _'fetter,' shackle_, _Cp, MkL, Ps_: _check,
restraint_, _Wa_.

fetorwrâsen f. _fetter, chain_, #An# 1109.

+fetran, +fetrian = +feterian

fêtt I. pres. 3 sg. of fêdan. II. = f¯ætt

fettan = fetian

fette pret. 3 sg. of fetian.

fêð = fêhð pres. 3 sg. of fôn.

fêða m. _foot-soldier_, AO: _band of foot-soldiers, troop_, Æ: _warfare,
battle_? #Jul# 389.

fêðan _to lead_, Æ: _go on foot_? Æ (9^449).

fêðe n. _power of locomotion, walking, gait, pace_, Æ, AO.

fêðecempa ¶ m. _foot-soldier_.

fêðegang m. _journey on foot_, #Gen# 2513.

fêðegeorn _anxious to go_, #Rd# 32^9.

fêðegest ¶ m. _guest coming on foot, traveller_.

fêðehere m. _infantry_, AO.

fêðehwearf m. _band of footmen_, #Gu# 162.

fêðelâst ¶ m. _step, track, course_.

fêðelêas ¶ _footless, crippled_.

fêðemenn mp. _infantry_, NG, WW.

fêðemund f. _fore-paw_, #Rd# 16^17.

feðer (æ) f. nap. feð(e)ra, feðre '_feather_,' _Lcd, Ph_; pl. _wings_,
_Bo, Mt, OET_; CP: _pen_, _Lk_; CP.

feðer- = fêower-, fiðer-

feðeran = fiðerian

feðerb¯ære _provided with feathers, winged_, GPH 390.

feðerbedd n. _feather-bed_, WW 124^19.

feðerberend _provided with feathers, feathered_, WW 465^20.

feðercræft m. _embroidery_, WW 491^3.

feðergearwe fp. _feathers of the arrow_, B 3119.

feðergeweorc n. _feather-embroidery_.

feðerhama m. _wings, plumage_, _Cp, Gen_. ['_featherham_']

fêðespêdig _speedy of foot_, #Cra# 53.

fêðewîg ¶ m. _battle on foot, affray_.

feðm = fæðm

feðorbyrste _split into four_, #Lcd# 148a (A 30·129).

feðra, feðre v. feðer.

feðrian _to become fledged_, OEG 26^27.

+fêðrian _to load_, AS 1^11. [fôðor]

feðriht _feathered_, MtL p7^17.

fêðu (WW 110^29) = fêða

fêðung f. _walking, motion_, Æ.

fex == feax

fîag- (N) = fêog-

fibulae (#Gl#) = fîfele

+fic n. _deceit_. [v. '_fickle_']

fîc m. _fig, fig-tree_: _(fig-disease), venereal ulcer, hemorrhoids_,
#Lcd#. [_L._ ficus]

fîcâdl f. _fig-disease_ (v. fîc).

fîcæppel m. _fig_.

fîcbêam m. _fig-tree_, Æ, CP.

-fician v. be-f.

fîclêaf n. _fig-leaf_.

ficol _'fickle,' cunning, tricky_, _KGl_; W.

fîctrêow n. _fig-tree_.

ficung f. _fraud, trickery_, LL 242[24]; 254[28,2].

fîcwyrm m. _intestinal worm_, #Lcd# 122a.

fîcwyrt f. _fig-wort_, WW 134^32.

fîeftîene = fîftîene

fieht pres. 3 sg. of feohtan.

±fiell (æ, e, ea, y) mn. _fall, destruction_, AO, CP: _death,
slaughter_: _precipice_: _case, inflection_, #ÆGr# 91^14 (y). [feallan]

fiell- v. fyll.

fielt pres. 3 sg. of fealdan.

fielð pres. 3 sg. of feallan.

fîend = fêond, also ds. of fêond.

+fîend (ý) mp _foes, enemies_, _Lk_. ['_i-feond_']

fîendwîc n. _enemy's camp_, #LPs# 77^28.

fier v. feorr II.

fîer- = fêower-

fierd (æ, e, eo, y) f. _national levy or army_, _Chr_: _military
expedition, campaign_, _Ma, PPs_; AO: _camp_. ['_ferd_']

fierd- v. also fyrd-.

fierdian (y) _to go on an expedition, march_, #Chr#.

fierdlêas _without an army, undefended, unprotected_, #Chr# 894#a#.

fieren- = firen-

fîerfête = fêowerfête

-fierme (eo) v. or-f.  [[under "orfeorme"]]

fierra, fierrest, fierresta v. feorr II.

fiersn (e, eo, y) f. _heel_. [_Ger._ ferse]

fierst = first

fîf usu. indecl. before sb.; but when alone, has na. fîfe, g. fîfa, d.
fîfum '_five_,' _A, Gen, Mt_.

fîfalde f. _butterfly_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ falter]

fîfbêc fp. _Pentateuch_, WW 470^8.

fife v. fîf.

fîfecgede _having five angles_, #ÆGr# 289^15.

fîfel n. _(huge) sea-monster, giant_, #Wald# 2^10.

fîfelcynn n. _race of sea-monsters_, B 104.

fîfeldôr n. _door of sea-monsters, river Eider_, #Wid# 43.

fîfele f. _buckle_, WW 403^7. [_L._ '_fibula_']

fîfelfota '_petilus_,' A 8·449.

fîfelstrêam m. _ocean, sea_, #Met# 26^26.

fîfelw¯æg m. _ocean, sea_, #El# 237.

fîffalde = fîfalde

fîffeald '_five-fold_,' _Æ_: _five each_, CM 840.

fîffêted _five-footed_, OEG 130.

fîffingre f. _'potentilla_,' '_primula,' cinquefoil, oxlip_? _Lcd_.
['_fivefinger_']

fîfflêre _five-storied_, Æ. [flôr]

fîfgêar n. _period of five years, lustrum_, WW 431^16.

fîf-hund, -hundred num. _five hundred_.

fîflæppede _having five lobes_, #Lcd# 59b.

fîf-lêaf n., -lêafe f. _'potentilla,' cinquefoil_, _Lcd_. ['_fiveleaf_']

fîfmægen n. _magic power_, #Sol# 136. [fîfel, mægen]

fîfnihte _five days old_, #Ans# 129·22.

fîfta '_fifth_,' _Æ, Mk_; AO, CP.

fîftafæder v. fæder.

fîfte _fifthly_, LL 158[16].

fîfteg = fîftig

fîftegða = fîftêoða

fîftêne = fîftîene

fîfteogoða '_fiftieth_,' _Æ_; CP.

fîf-têoða (ý^1). -têða, -tegða '_fifteenth_,' _BH, Lcd_.

fîftîene (ý^1, ê^2, ý^2) (often w. g.) '_fifteen_,' _A, B, Gu_; AO.

fîftîenewintre (e^2) _fifteen years old_, #Bl# 213^1.

fîftig num. '_fifty_,' _Æ_: sb. _a set of fifty_, _Mk_.

Fiftigdæg m. _Pentecost_, MkL p5^10.

fîftigeða, fîttigoða = fîfteogoða

fîftigfeald _'fiftyfold,' containing fifty_, _Æ_.

fîftýne (Æ) = fîftîene

fîfwintre _five years old_, #ÆGr# 287^14.

fîgan^1 '_frigere_,' Ep.

fihl n? _cloth, rag_, NG. [?= fliht]

fiht I. pres. 3 sg. of feohtan. II. = feht

fiht- = fyht-

fîhtan = fýhtan

+fihð pres. 3 sg. of +fêon.

fîl (#Gl#) = fêol

+fîlan = +fýlan

+filce = +fylce

fild sb. _milking_, #Lcd# 53b.

fildcumb m. _milk-pail_, #Lcd# 122b.

filde _field-like, of the nature of a plain_, AO 74^12.

+filde n. _field, plain_, AO 12^10. [feld]

filgð, filhð pres. 3 sg. of fêolan.

fili- = fylg-

fîllende ptc. _rubbing_, WW 407^36.

filiðe n. _hay_.

filiðlêag m. _meadow_, Ct.

fill == fyll

fille _thyme_? OEG 56^38. [= cerfille?]

fillen = fellen

filmen (y) n. _'film,' membrane, thin skin_, _Lcd_; Æ: _foreskin_, Æ.

filst- = fylst-

filð pres. 3 sg. of feallan.

fîn f. _heap, pile_. v. OEG 2456.

fîna m. _woodpecker_, WW 49^2.

finc m. '_finch_,' _Ep, WW_.

fînd = fîend

findan^3 (but occl. wk. pret. funde) (±) _to find, meet with_, _B, Gen,
Jul, Met_: _discover, obtain by search or study_, _Cr, MtL, Ps_:
_provide_: _consider, devise, arrange, dispose, decide_, AO, CP: _show,
inform_. f. æt _obtain from_.

findend m. _finder_, GPH 391.

±findig (ý) _capable_, #ÆGr# 69^4.

finding f. _invention, initiative_, CM 1082.

finel = finul

finger m. '_finger_,' _Mt, VPs_; Æ, CP.

finger-æppla, -appla npl. _finger-shaped fruits, dates_, ÆL, OEG.

fingerdocca? m? _finger-muscle_, #Gl#.

fingerlic _belonging to a finger or ring_, WW 291^26.

fingarlið n. _finger-joint_, NC 343.

fingermæl n. _finger's length_, NR 22^8.

finig (y) = fynig

finiht _finny_.

finn m. '_fin_,' _Æ_.

finol == finul

finst = findest pres. 2 sg. of findan.

fint pres. 3 sg. of findan.

finta ¶ m. _tail_: _consequence, result_.

finul (e^1, y^1, o^2), finugl m., finu(g)le '_fennel_,' _Ep, WW_. [_L._
foenuculum]

finuls¯æd (o^2) n. _fennel-seed_, #Lcd# 157a.

fîo == fêo

fîr = fýr

fîras ¶ mp. _men, human beings_.

fird = fierd

fird- = fierd-, fyrd-

firen f. _transgression, sin, crime_: _outrage, violence_: _torment,
suffering_.

firenbealu n. _transgression_, #Cr# 1276.

firencræft m. _wickedness_, #Jul# 14.

firend¯æd ¶ f. _wicked deed, crime_.

firenearfeðe n. _sinful woe_, #Gen# 709.

firenfremmende _sinful_, #Cr# 1118.

firenful (y) _sinful, wicked_.

firengeorn _sinful_, #Cr# 1606.

firenhicga (y^1, y^2) m. _adulterer_, GPH 389.

firenhicge (fyrn-) f. _adulteress_, OEG.

firenhicgend (fyrn-) _adulterous_, OEG.

±firenian (y) _to sin_: _commit adultery_; _revile_.

firenlic (y) _wicked_. adv. -lîce _vehemently, rashly_, #Wald# 1^20.

firenligerian _to commit fornication_, #RSPs# 105^39.

firenlust m. _lust, sinful desire, luxury, wantonness_, AO, CP.

firenlustful _wanton, luxurious_, A 12·502^10.

firenlustgeorn _wanton_, W 253^5.

firensynnig _sinful_, #Cr# 1379.

firentâcnian (y) _to commit misdeeds_, RHy 6^21.

firenðearf (y) f. _dire distress_, B 14.

firenum _excessively, very, intensely_: _malignantly_. [dp. of firen]

firenweorc ¶ n. _evil deed, sin_.

firenwyrcende ¶ _sinning, sinful_.

firenwyrhta (y) ¶ m. _evil-doer_.

fîrfoda = fýrfoda  [[headword spelled "fýrfôda"]]

firgen _mountain, mountain-woodland_. [?only in compounds]

  [[Entry from first edition; note "only in compounds".]]

firgenbêam (y) m. _mountain tree_, B 1414. [_Goth._ fairguni]

firgenbeorg (fergenberig) _mountain_, #Rune-Casket#.

firgenbucca m. _ibex_, #Lcd#.

firgendstrêam = firgenstrêam

firgen-gât f. nap. -g¯æt _ibex_, #Gl#.

firgenheafod n. _mountain-headland_.

firgenholt n. _mountain-wood_, B 1393.

firgenstrêam ¶ m. _mountain-stream, woodland-stream_.

firgin- = firgen-

firht = freht

firhð == ferhð

firigendstrêam = firgenstrêam

firinggât = firgengât

firmdig = frymdig

firmettan _to ask, beg_, AO 186^6.

firn- = firen-, fyrn-

firr, firra, firre, firrest v. feorr.

first I. (e, ie, y) mn. _period, space of time, time, respite, truce_,
_B, Chr_; CP. ['_frist_'] II. (ie) f. _ceiling_, Ep. [_Ger._ first] III.
= fyrst

firsthrôf n. _ceiling_.

first-mearc, -gemearc f. _period of time, appointed time, interval,
respite_.

firð- = fyrð-

firwet- = fyrwit-

fisc m. '_fish_,' _VPs_; Æ, AO, CP; Mdf.

fisc-að, -(n)oð m. _fishing_, AO. _fishpond_: _a catch of fish_.
[v. NC 286]

fiscbrýne m. _fish-brine_, WW 128^39.

fisccynn n. _fish tribe_, Æ.

fiscdêah f. _fish-dye, purple_, OEG 5193.

fiscere m. _'fisher,' fisherman_, _AO, Mt_: _kingfisher (bird)_.

fiscfell (NG) = fiscpôl

fiscflôdu? m. _fish-flood, sea_, OET.

fischûs n. _place where fish is sold_, WW 184^40.

fiscian _to 'fish,'_ _Bo_.

fiscmere m. _fishpond_, WW 484^11.

fiscnað = fiscað

fiscnett n. _fishing-net_.

fiscnoð, fiscoð = fiscað

fiscpôl m. _fishpond_, _JnL, WW_. ['_fishpool_']

fiscðrût m. _small fish_, MtL 15^34.

fiscwelle I. m. _fishpond_, A 13·321. II. = fiscwylle

fiscwer m. _fish-weir, fish-trap_, LL 454[9].

fiscwylle _full of fish_, BH. [weallan]

fisting f. '_fesiculatio_,' WW.

fitelfôta _thin, slender_, WW 161^20.

fitersticca m. _tent-nail_, WW 187^5 (?= fiðersticca).

fitt I. f? _struggle, contest, fight_, #Gen# 2072. II. f. _'fit,' song,
poem_, _Bo_; #Gl#. [? connected with I. v. #SkED# under fit (2)]

fiðele f. _fiddle_.

fiðelere m. '_fiddler_,' _WW_ 311^23.

fiðelestre f. _female fiddler_, WW 311^24.

fiðer- = fêower-, feðer-

fiðercian _to flutter_, GD 100^19. [fiðere]

fiðerd¯æled _quadripartite, quartered_, OEG.

fiðere (y) n. nap. fið(e)ru, fiðera(s) _wing_, Æ, CP.

fiðerfeald '_quadriga_,' EHy 4^19.

fiðerflêdende (y^1) _flowing in four streams_, GPH 390.

fiðerflôwende _flowing in four streams_, OEG 48^2.

fiðerhama m. _wing-covering_, ÆL 34^74 (y^1).

+fiðerhamod _covered with feathers_, ÆH 1·466^27.

fiðerhîwe '_quadriformis_,' OEG 177.

+fiðerian, fiðrian _to provide with feathers, or wings_.

fiðerlêas _without wings_, Wy 22.

fiðerrîce (y) n. _tetrarchy_, #Chr# 12#c#.

fiðerscêatas mp. _four quarters_? #Sol# 32.

fiðersleht m. _flapping of wings, joy_? OEG 4892.

fiðru v. fiðere.

fixa, fixas, fixum = fisca, fiscas, fiscum, gp., nap. and dp. of fisc.

fixen == fyxen

fixian, fixoð, fixnoð = fiscian, fiscað

flâ f. _arrow_, _AO_. ['_flo_'; = flân]

flacg _cataplasm, plaster_, WW 380^28.

flacor ¶ _flying (of arrows)_. [cp. _Ger._ flackern]

flæ- = flea-, fleo-

fl¯æ- = flâ-, flêa-, flêo-, flîe-

fl¯æc = fl¯æsc

fl¯ære f. _earlap_, WW 157^12.

fl¯æsc (ê) n. '_flesh_,' _Æ, Cp, Lk, VP_; CP: _body (as opposed to
soul)_, _B, Jn_: _carnal nature_, _Mt_: _living creatures_, _Lk, Ps_.

fl¯æsc¯æt m. _animal food_, RB.

fl¯æscbana m. _murderer_, GD.

fl¯æsccofa m. _body_, #LPs# 118^120.

fl¯æsccýping f. _meat-market_, WW 145^26.

fl¯æsceht _fleshy_, #Lcd# 83a.

fl¯æscen _of flesh, like flesh_, _GPH_; Æ. ['_fleshen_']

fl¯æscennes = fl¯æscnes

fl¯æscgebyrd f. _incarnation_, OEG 429.

fl¯æschama (o^2) ¶ m. _body, carcase_.

+fl¯æschamod _incarnate_, Æ.

fl¯æschord ¶ n. _body_.

fl¯æschûs n. _'flesh-house,' place where meat is sold_, _WW_.

fl¯æsclic _'fleshly,' corporeal, carnal_, _Æ, BH_.

fl¯æsclîcnes f. _incarnate condition_, _Æ_. ['_fleshliness_']

fl¯æscmangere m. _butcher_, _WW_. ['_flesh-monger_']

fl¯æscmaðu f. _maggot_, WW 122^13.

fl¯æsc-mete m. nap. -mettas _flesh, animal food_, _LL_; Æ, CP.
['_fleshmeat_']

±fl¯æscnes f. _incarnation_, #Chr#.

+fl¯æscod _incarnate_, Æ.

fl¯æscsand _portion of meat_, NC 287.

fl¯æscstr¯æt f. _meat-market_, Æ.

fl¯æsctâwere m. _torturer of the flesh, executioner_, WW 189^19.

fl¯æsctôð m. _one of the teeth_, WW 415^24.

fl¯æscðênung f. _use as food_, NC 287.

fl¯æscwellere m. _executioner, hangman_, WW 382^29. [fl¯æsc, cwellere]

fl¯æscwyrm m. _maggot_, _Lcd_. ['_fleshworm_']

fl¯æslic = fl¯æsclic

flæðecomb m. _weaver's comb_, WW.

flæx (MtR) = fleax

flagen pp. of flêan.

flâh I. n. _wickedness, treachery_, #Rim# 47. II. ¶ adj. _wily,
deceitful, hostile_.

flân mf. _barb, arrow, javelin, dart_, _B, Ma, Æ_; AO, CP. ['_flane_']

flânboga ¶ m. _bow_.

flanc m. _flank_, OEG 50^35.

flângeweorc ¶ n. _shooting-gear, arrows_.

flânhred? _arrow-swift_? _arrow-equipped_? (_of death_), #Rim# 72.

flâniht _relating to darts_, WW 425^34.

flânðracu ¶ f. _onset, attack_.

flasce (x) f. _'flask,' bottle_.

flât pres. 3 sg. of flîtan.

flaxe (_GD, WW_) = flasce

flaxfôte _web-footed_. [= flox-]

flêa I. mf. '_flea_,' _Ep, Lcd_. II. = flêah n.

flêag pret. 3 sg. of flêogan.

flêah I. n. _albugo, a white spot in the eye_, CP. II. m. = flêa I. III.
pret. 3 sg. of flêogan. IV. pret. 3 sg. of flêon.

flêam m. _flight_, AO, Æ. on f. gebrengan _to put to flight_. on f.
weorðan _to flee_.

flêamdôm m. _flight_, NC 287.

flêamlâst m. _apostacy_, WW 500^3.

flêan^6 _to 'flay,'_ _Cp_.

±fleard n. _nonsense, folly, deception, fraud, superstition_, _LL_; OEG.
['_flerd_']

fleardere m. _trifler_, NC 287.

fleardian _to be foolish, err, go astray_: _grow luxuriantly_.

flêat I. pret. 3 sg. of flêotan. II. = flêot

flêawyrt f. _fleabane_, _WW_. ['_fleawort_']

fleax (æ, e) n. _'flax,' linen_, _CP_; Æ (e).

fleax- = flex-

flecta = fleohta

fled = flett

-flêdan v. ofer-f.

flêde adj. _in flood, full, overflowing_, AO. [flôd]

flêding f. _flowing_, Æ.

flêg- = flêog-

flêge _little ship_, JnL 6^22 (oe).

flehta = fleohta

flêm- = flîem-

flene = flyne

flêo = flêa

±flêogan^2 (intr., cp. flêon) _to 'fly,'_ _B, El, Jud, Jul_; Æ, CP:
_flee, take to flight_, _Ma_. [_Ger._ fliegen]

flêoge (ê, ý) f. _any winged insect, 'fly,'_ _Æ_; CP. [_Ger._ fliege]

flêogenda m. _bird_, _CPs_.

flêogende _flying, winged_, #ÆGr# 44^9.

flêogendlic _flying, winged_, #ÆGr# 55^2.

flêogryft n. _fly-curtain_, WW 373^21.

flêohcynn m. _a kind of flies_, #PPs# 104^27.

flêohnet n. _'fly-net,' curtain_, _Jud_.

fleohta (flecta) m. _hurdle_.

±flêon^2 _to fly from_, _'flee,' avoid, escape_, _G, Met, VPs_; AO, CP:
_put to flight_, Æ: _fly_ (intr.), _Æ_.

flêos (#VPs#) = flîes

fleos- = fles-

flêot (êa) m. flêota f. _water, sea, estuary, river_, _AO_: _raft,
ship_, _Hy_. ['_fleet_']

flêotan^2 _to float, drift, flow, swim, sail_, _Æ, CP_: (tr.) _skim_,
#Lcd#. ['_fleet_']

flêote (or ? flêota) = flêot

flêotende _floating_, _Gen_ 1447. ['_fleeting_']

flêotig _fleet, swift_, #Rd# 52^4.

flêotwyrt f. _seaweed_, #Lcd# 101a.

fleoðe (ea) f. _water-lily_, #Lcd#.

flêow pret. 3 sg. of flôwan.

flêowð = flêwð pres. 3 sg. of flôwan.

-flêre v. ðri-, fîf-f.

flêring f. _story (of a building)_, Æ. [flôr]

flês = flîes

flêsc == fl¯æsc

fleswian (eo) _to whisper_? _pull a wry face_? BH 122^17 (JAW 30). [or ?
flêswian _dissemble_, ES 44·470]

flet == flett

flêt, flête = flîete

fletræst f. _couch_, B 1241.

fletsittend ¶ m. _sitter in hall, courtier, guest_.

flett n. _floor, ground_, _B_: _dwelling, hall, mansion_. ['_flet_']

flettgefeoht n. _fighting in a house_, LL 18[39].

flettgesteald ¶ n. _household goods_.

flettp¯æð m. _floor of a house_, #Gen# 2729.

fletwerod n. _hall-troop, body-guard_, B 476.

fleðecamb = flæðecomb

flêwsa m. _flowing, flux, issue (bodily disorder)_, #Lcd#. [flôwan]

flêwð pres. 3 sg. of flôwan.

flex = fleax

flexæcer m. _flax land_, KC 5·389^16.

flexgescot n. _contribution of flax_.

flexlîne f. _flax-winder, reel_? _flax line_? _thread_? LL 455[15].

+flîan, +flýn _to drive out_. [flêon]

flicce n. _'flitch' of bacon, ham_, _CD, Gl, WW_.

flicorian, flicerian _to move the wings, flutter_, _Æ_. ['_flicker_']

flîe = flêah I.

flîehð pres. 3 sg. of flêon.

flîema (ê, î, ý) m. _fugitive, exile, outlaw_, AO. Godes f.
_excommunicate person_, LL 352[66]. [flêam]

±flîeman (¯æ, ê, ý) _to put to flight, drive away, banish_, _Gen_; CP.
['_fleme_'; flêam]

flîeman-feorm, -feorming f. _offence of, or penalty for, sheltering
fugitives from justice_, LL 102[30]; 2·302.

+flîeme (ê) adj. _fugitive_, DR 147^8.

flîeming (flýmig) sb. _fugitive_, OEG 2965.

flîes (ê, êo, î, ý) n. _'fleece,' wool, fur, seal skin_, _LL, Ps_ (êo).

flîet (WW 489^3) = flêot

flîetan = flîtan

flîete (ê, ý) f. _cream, curds_: _punt_. [flêotan]

flîg = flêah I.

flîg- = flêog-, flýg-

fligel m? n? '_flail_,' A 9·264.

fliht I. m. _patch_, MkLR 2^21 (y). [flêohtan] II. = flyht

  [[I. Cross-reference unidentified.]]

flihteclâð m. _patch_, WW 206^13.

flîhð pres. 3 sg. of flêon.

flîma = flîema

flint m. _'flint,' rock_, _Æ, Ep, WW_.

flinten _of flint_, W 252^1.

flintgr¯æg _gray like flint_, #Rd# 4^19.

flîo = flêah I.

flîs = flîes

±flit (usu. +) n. _strife_, _Ps_: _dispute, contention_: '_scandalum_';
tô +flîtes _emulously_. ['_flite_']

±flîtan^1 _to strive, quarrel, dispute, contend_, _B, BH_; Æ, CP.

flitcræft m. _dialectics, logic_, OEG.

flitcræftlic _logical_.

flîtend m. _contentious person_.

flîtere m. _disputer, chider, quarreler, schismatic_, _Ep_. ['_fliter_']

±flit-ful (OEG), -fullic _contentious_.

+flitfulnes f. _litigiousness_, A 11·102^84.

±flitgeorn m. _contentious person_.

+flitgeorn _contentious_, RB 130^20.

+flitlîce _emulously_, BH 406^17.

±flitm¯ælum _contentiously, emulously_.

-flitme? v. un-f.

fliusum (OET) = flêosum dp. of flêos.

flôc n. _flounder_? WW.

flôcan^7 _to clap, applaud_, #Rd# 21^34.

flocc m. _'flock,' company, troop_, _Æ, Chr_.

floccm¯ælum _in troops_, _AO_. ['_flockmeal_']

flocgian _to shine forth_, GPH 399.

flocrâd f. _invading band, troop_, #Chr#.

flocslite m. _sedition_, WW 116^26; A 8·451.

flôd mn. _mass of water_, _'flood,' wave_, _Æ, Gen, Mt, VPs_; AO, CP:
_flow (of tide as opposed to ebb)_, _tide, flux, current, stream_,
_Chr_; AO: _the flood, deluge_, _B, Lk_; Æ.

flôdblâc _pale as water_? _pale through fear of drowning_, #Ex# 497.

flôde f. _channel, gutter_, #Gl#: _flood_? (Earle), EC 120^31.

flôdegsa m. _flood terror_, #Ex# 446.

flôden _of a river_, WW 240.

flôdhamm m. _piece of land surrounded by water_? KC 1·289^16.

flôdlic _of or belonging to a stream_, #ÆGr# 54^9.

flôdweard ¶ f. _sea-wall_.

flôdweg ¶ m. _watery way, sea_.

flôdwudu m. _ship_, #Cr# 854.

flôdwylm ¶ m. _flowing stream, raging billows_. [weallan]

flôdýð f. _wave of the sea_, B 542.

flogen I. pp. of flêon. II. pp. of flêogan.

floggettan _to fly, flutter_, #Sc#; GD 100^19.

  [[Entry before author's corrections:
  floggettan _to fluctuate_. [flêogan] ]]

flogoða m. _liquor_, GPH 402.

flôh f. _chip_, WW 416^4.

flohtenfôte _web-footed_, #Lcd# 33b.

flôr fm. ds. flôra, flôre _'floor,' pavement, ground_, _B, Lk_; Æ:
_bottom (of a lake, etc.)_, _Sat_.

flôrisc _flowery_, CM 44.

flôrstân m. _paving-stone, tessella_.

flot n. _deep water, sea_. on flot(e) _afloat_. ['_float_']

flota m. _(floater), boat, ship, vessel_: _fleet sailor_: (¶) _pirate_.
['_float_']

+flota m. _floater (whale)_, #Whale# 7.

floten pp. of flêotan.

floterian _to flutter, fly_, Æ: _float, be flooded, overflow_, Æ.

flothere m. _piratical fleet_, B 2915.

flotian _to 'float,'_ _Chr_. [flêotan]

flotlic _nautical, naval_, WW 205^27.

flotmann m. _sailor, pirate_, Æ.

flotorian = floterian

flotscip n. _ship, bark_, WW.

flotsmeru n. _floating grease, fat_, LL 453[4].

flotweg m. _ocean_, #Hu# 41.

flôwan^7 _to 'flow,' stream, issue_, _Ps, Sol, VPs_; AO, CP: _become
liquid, melt_, _VPs_: _abound_: (+) _overflow_, AO.

flôwednes, flôwnes f. _flow, flux, overflow, torrent_, CP.

flôwende '_flowing_,' _Ma_ 65.

flôwendlic _flowing_, #LPs# 147^18.

flôwing f. '_flowing_,' _MtL_.

flugl- (OET 26) = fugl-

flugol _fleet, swift_: _fleeting_.

flugon I. pret. pl. of flêogan. II. pret. pl. of flêon. III. = fulgon
pret. pl. of fêolan.

fluton pret. pl. of flêotan.

flycerian = flicerian  [[under "flicorian"]]

flycge _fledged_, OEG.

flycticlâð (#Gl#) = flihteclâð

flyge (i) m. _flight_.

flýge = flêoge

flygepîl n. _flying dart_, #Mod# 27.

flygerêow _wild in flight_, #Gu# 321.

flygul = flugol

flýhst pres. 2 sg. of flêon.

flyht m. I. _flying, 'flight,'_ _Æ_ (i), OET. on flyhte _on the wing_.
II. = fliht

flyhthwæt ¶ _swift of flight_.

flýhð pres. 3 sg. of flêon.

flým- = flîem-

+flýn = +flîan

flyne (e) f. _batter_, #Lcd#.

flýs (Æ) = flîes

flyt = flit

flýt- = flît-

flýt pres. 3 sg. of flêotan.

flýte I. m? _'pontomium,' boat_, WW. [cp. flêot] II. f. = flîete

flýtme f. _fleam (blood-letting instrument)_. [_L._ phlebotomum]

flyð = flyht

±fnæd n. nap. fnadu _fringe, border, hem_, Æ.

fn¯æran, fn¯ærettan _to breathe heavily, snort, fume_. v. NC 356.

fnæs I. n. dp. fnasum _fringe_, WW 425^27. II. pret. 3 sg. of fnesan.
  [[error for "fnêsan"?]]

fn¯æst m. _blowing, blast, breath_, _Lcd_. ['_fnast_']

fn¯æstian _to breathe hard_, _Lcd_. [v. '_fnast_']

fnêosan _to breathe hard, sneeze_.

fnêosung f. _sneezing_, _WW_. [v. '_fnese_']

±fnêsan^5 _to sneeze_: _pant, gasp_.

fnora m. _sneezing_, Æ, #Gl#.

fô pres. 1 sg. of fôn.

foca m. _cake (baked on the hearth)_, ÆL 18^164.

fôda m. _'food,' sustenance, nourishment_, _Æ, CD_: _fuel_, _Sc_.

fodder = fôdor

foddor, foddur = fôdor

fôdor n. _'fodder' (for cattle), food (for man)_, _Æ, LL_: _case,
sheath_, #Gl#.

fôdorbrytta (fodder-) m. _distributor of food, herdsman_, WW 111^39.

fôdorgifu (foddur-) _food_, #PPs#.

fôdorhec (fodder-) _rack for food or fodder_, LL 455[17].

fôdornoð m. _sustenance_.

fôdorðegu ¶ f. _partaking of food, feeding, repast, food_.

fôdorwela (foddur-) m. _wealth of food, provisions_, #Rd# 33^10.

fôdrað m. _provisions_, AO.

foe- (N) = fe-, fê-

+fôg n. _joining, joint_.

+fôgstân (fôh) m. _keystone_, CP 253^19.

fôh imperat. of fôn.

foht = feoht

fohten pp. of feohtan.

fol (wk. adj.) = full

+fol adj. _with foal_.

fol- = ful-

fola m. _'foal,' colt_, _Bl, Mk_; Æ.

folc n. _folk, people, nation, tribe_, _Æ, B_; AO, CP: _a collection or
class of persons, laity_, _Bl, Bo_: _troop, army_.

folcâgende ¶ _ruling_.

folcbealo n. _great tribulation_, #Men# 125.

folcbearn ¶ n. _man_.

folccû (folcû) f. _people's cow_, #PPs# 67^27.

folccûð _noted_: _public_, BH.

folccwên f. _queen of a nation_, B 641.

folccwide n. _popular saying_, NC 287.

folccyning ¶ m. _king of a nation_.

folcdryht ¶ f. _multitude of people_.

folcefiren ¶ f. _public crime_.

folcegetrum = folcgetrum

folcegsa m. _general terror_, #PPs# 88^33.

folcfrêa m. _lord of the people_, #Gen# 1852.

folcfrig _having full rights of citizenship_, LL 13[8]; 344[45].

folcgedrêfnes f. _tribulation_, NC 287.

folcgefeoht n. _pitched battle_, AO.

folcgemôt n. _meeting of the people of a town or district_, _LL_.
['_folkmoot_']

folcgerêfa m. _public officer_, WW.

folcgeriht = folcriht

folcgesetnes f. _statute_.

folcgesîð ¶ m. _prince, noble_.

folcgestealla ¶ m. _companion in war_.

folcgestrêon n. _public treasure_, #Gen# 1981.

folcgetæl n. _number of fighting men_, #Ex# 229.

folcgetrum ¶ n. _army, host_.

folcgeðrang n. _crowd_, AO 134^26.

folcgewinn n. _fighting, war_, #Met# 1^10.

folcisc _of the people, popular, secular, common_.

folcl¯æsung = folclêasung

folclagu f. _law of the people, public law_.

folcland n. _land held by freemen according to tribal rules of family
inheritance_, v. LL 2·403.

folclâr f. _homily_, #Gd#.

folclêasung f. _slander_, LL.

folclic _public, common, popular, plebeian, worldly, secular_, GD
209^13.

folcmægen ¶ n. _public force, army_.

folcm¯ægð ¶ f. _tribe, nation_.

folcm¯ælum = floccm¯ælum

folcm¯ære _celebrated_, #Gen# 1801.

folcmôt = folcgemôt

folcnêd f. _people's need_, #PPs# 77^16.

folcr¯æd ¶ m. _public benefit_.

folcr¯æden f. _decree of the people_, #Cra# 42.

folcriht I. n. _right of the people, common law_, _LL_. ['_folkright_']
II. adj. _according to common law_.

folcsæl n. _house_, #Rd# 2^5.

folcscearu ¶ f. _people, nation, province_: _people's land_, B 73
(Earle).

folcsceaða m. _villain_, #An# 1595.

folcscipe m. _nation, people_, #Rd# 33^10.

folcslite n. _sedition_, WW 111^26.

folcstede ¶ m. _dwelling-place_: _battlefield_.

folcstôw f. _country place_, BH 160^16.

folcswêot m? _troop, multitude_, #Ex# 577.

folctalu f. _genealogy_.

folctoga ¶ m. _chieftain, commander_.

folctruma m. _host_, #LPs#.

folcû = folccû

folcweleg _populous_, WW 476^16.

folcwer ¶ m. _man_.

folcwiga m. _warrior_, #Rd# 15^23.

folcwita m. _public councillor, senator_, #Cra# 77.

folcwôh n. _deception of the public_, ÆL 23^691.

foldærn ¶ n. _earth-house, grave_.

foldâgend m. _earth-possessor, earth-dweller_, #Ph# 5. (MS. folcâgend)

foldbold n. _house, castle_, B 773.

foldbûend m. _earth-dweller, man, inhabitant of a country_, CP.

folde (eo) f. _earth, ground, soil, terra firma_, _B, Jud_: _land,
country, region_: _world_.

foldgræf ¶ n. _earth-grave_.

foldgr¯æg _grey as the earth_? #GnC# 31.

foldhrêrende _walking on the earth_, #Pa# 5.

foldræst f. _rest in the earth_, #Cr# 1029.

foldwæstm m. _fruits of the earth_, #Ph# 654.

foldweg ¶ m. _way, path, road_: _earth_.

foldwela m. _earthly riches_, #Rim# 68.

foldwong ¶ m. _plain, earth_.

folen, folgen pp. of fêolan.

folgað (AO) = folgoð

folgere m. _'follower,' attendant, disciple_, Æ, CP: _successor_, AO
150^27: _freeman who is not a householder_.

±folgian (often w. d.) _to 'follow,'_ _Jn, Lk_: _accompany_, _Ps_:
_follow after_, _B_: (+) _attain_, CP 383^27: _obey, serve, oberve_,
_El_. (v. also fylgan).

folgoð m. _body of retainers, following, retinue_: _pursuit, employment,
service, dignity, office, rule_, Æ, AO, CP: _jurisdiction, district_:
_condition of life, destiny_.

folm ¶, folme f. _palm, hand_. [fêlan]

fon = fann

fôn^7 (±) _to take, grasp, seize, catch_, _B, BH, Gen_; CP, Æ: _capture,
make prisoner_, _Chr_: _receive, accept, assume, undertake_, _B, Sol_;
CP: _meet with, encounter_. f. on _take up, begin, resume_, Æ: _take
to_, _Æ, Bo_. f. tô rîce _ascend the throne_, Æ, AO. f. tôgædre _join
together, join issue, engage in battle_. him tôgêanes feng _clutched at
him_, B. him on fultum feng _helped them_, #Jud# 300. hlyst +f.
_listen_. ['_fang_,' '_i-fang_']

fond = fand pret. 3 sg. of findan.

fong- = fang-

fonn = fann

font == fant

fonu = fanu

for I. prep. (with d., inst. and a.) (local) _before, in the sight of,
in or into the presence of_, _B, Gen_: _as far as_, IM 119^13:
(temporal) _during, before_: (causal) _'for,' on account of, for the
sake of, through, because of, owing to, from, by reason of_, _Æ, B, Gen,
Met_. for worulde _as regards this world_, Æ. for Dryhtne _by God_: _in
order to_: _in place of, instead of, equivalent to, at the price of_,
_Æ, Gu, Mt_: _in preference to_, _Rood_: _in spite of_, _Chr_. II. conj.
_for, because_. for hwý, for hwâm, for hwon _wherefore_? for ðâm, for
ðon, for ðý _therefore, because, since_. for ðâm ðe (ðý), for ðý ðe
_because_. for ðý ðæt, for ðâm ðæt _in order that_. III. adv. _too,
very_, Æ. for ân _only_.

for- I. denotes loss or destruction (as in fordôn, forgiefan), or is
intensitive or pejorative, as in forbærnan, forrotian. It is not
connected with the preposition 'for.' Its original form was fer- [cp.
_Ger._ ver-]. II. occly = fore-

fôr I. f. _going, course, journey, expedition_, _BH_; AO: _way, manner
of life_. [faran] II. m. _pig, hog_, OEG. III. pret. 3 sg. of faran.

fora (N) = foran

fora- = fore-

forad = forod

foran I. prep. (w. d.) _before, opposite_. II. adv. _before, in front,
forward_, _Rd_; Æ, AO, CP: _to the front_, _Da_. foran ongean
_opposite_. ['_forne_']

foranbodig n. _thorax, chest_, WW 158^41.

forandæg _early part of the day_? Æ (NC), _first day_? (BT).

forane = foran II.

foranhêafod n. _forehead_, Æ.

foranniht f. _early part of the night, dusk, evening_, Æ.

forantô prep. (w. d.) _before_.

forâð = foreâð

forbærnan _to cause to burn, burn up, consume by fire, be consumed_, _Æ,
Chr_; AO. ['_forburn_']

forbærnednes f. _burning up_, #Lcd#.

forbearan = forberan

forbearnan = forbærnan

fôrbed n. _portable bed, litter_, ZDA 31.

forbêgan = forbîgan

forbelgan^3 _to be enraged_, #Bl#.

forbên f. _prayer_, DHy 138^13.

forbêodan^2 _to 'forbid,' prohibit_, _Chr, G_; Æ: _restrain_, _Ps_:
_refuse_, _Lk_: _repeal, annul_, LL 42[49].

forbêodendlic _dehortative, dissuasive_, #ÆGr# 225^11.

forbeornan^3 (e, y) _to burn, be consumed by fire_, AO.

forberan I. (sv^4) _to 'forbear,' abstain from, refrain_, CP: _suffer,
endure, tolerate, humour_, _CP, B, BH_: _restrain_. II. = foreberan

forbernan = forbeornan

forberstan^3 _to break, burst asunder, vanish, fail_, _LL_: _let go by
default_, EC 201´. ['_forburst_']

forbêtan = forebêtan

forbîgan (ê, ý) _to bend down, bow down, depreciate, abase, humiliate,
degrade_.

forbîgels m. _arch, arched roof_, WW 126^3.

forbindan^3 _to bind (up)_, _muzzle_, _CP_ 105^7. ['_forbind_']

forbisen = forebysen

forbîtan^1 _to bite through_, HL 18^391.

forblâwan^7 _to blow_, _AO_: _blow out, inflate_, _Lcd_. ['_forblow_']

forblindian _to blind_, MkR 6^52.

fôrbôc f. _itinerary_, OEG 2023.

forbod n. _prohibition_, _LL_; CP. ['_forbode_']

forboda = foreboda

forbrecan^5 (æ^2) _to break in pieces, bruise, violate, crush, destroy_,
_Jn_; AO, CP. forbrocen _broken down, decrepit_. ['_forbreak_']

for-brêdan^3, -bregdan _to tear in pieces_: _draw over, cover_: _change,
transform_, _Bo_. ['_forbraid_']

for-britan, -brittan = forbryttan

forbryt-ednes (#ESPs#), -ennes (#V^2Ps#) f. _contrition_.

forbrytian = forbryttan

forbryttan _to break in pieces, crush, bruise_.

forbûgan^2 _to bend from, refrain from, avoid, decline_, _Æ, Ma_; CP:
_flee from, escape_, CP: _hold down_. ['_forbow_']

forbýgan = forbîgan

forbyrd f. _abstention_, AO 30^25.

forbyrdian _to wait for_, #EPs# 32^20.

forbyrdig _forbearing_, NC 287.

forbyrnan (Æ) = forbeornan

force f. '_fork_,' _Æ, WW_.

forcêap _forestalling (in trade)_, LL 234[2,10]. [= *forecêap]

forceorfan^3 _to carve out, cut down, cut off, cut through, divide_, _Æ,
Chr_; AO, CP. ['_forcarve_']

forcêwan^2 _to bite off_, #Bo# 36^23.

for-cierran (CP) -cerran _to turn aside, prevent, avert, avoid_, CP:
_turn oneself away, escape_.

forcierrednes (y^2) f. _perversity_, GD 119^15: _turning aside_, #BPs#
125^1.

forcierring (e, y) f. _turning aside_, #CVPs# 125^1.

forcinnan _to deny, disown_? #Sol# 107.

forcippian (y) _to cut off_, RHy 2^12. [cp. _Eng._ chip]

forcl¯æman _to stop up_, #Gl#.

forclas mp. _prongs_? NC 287.

forclingan^3 _to wither, shrink up_, _Cp_. ['_forcling_']

forclyccan _to stop, close (ears)_, #RPs# 57^5.

forclýsan _to close up_, #Lcd# 3·92^22.

forcnîdan = forgnîdan

forcuman^4 _to come before, prevent, surprise_: _harass, wear out,
destroy_: _overcome, conquer, obtain_: _surpass_.

forcunnian _to tempt_: _understand_.

for-cûð (Æ) _bad, wicked, infamous, foul, despicable_, _Æ, Bo_; AO, CP.
adv. -cûðe. ['_forcouth_']

forcûðlic = forcûð

forcûðlîce = forcûðe  [[form of "forcûð"]]

forcweðan^5 _to speak ill of, abuse, revile_, CP: _reprove_: _refuse,
reject_, CP: _boast, promise great things_, #GnE# 49.

forcwolstan^3? _to swallow_, #Lcd# 18a.

forcwýsan _to shake violently_, #SPs# 109^7.

forcyppian = forcippian

forcyrran (Æ) = forcierran

forcýðan _to surpass in knowledge_: _understand_: _argue, urge_.

ford m. ds. forda '_ford_,' _Æ, AO_; Mdf.

ford¯ælan _to spend_.

fordêad _dead_, MtL 28^4.

fordelfan^3 _to delve, dig_, EC 120^28.

fordêman _to condemn, sentence, doom_, _Mt_; Æ: _prejudice_, EC 145:
_decide_, #Sc# 125^5. ['_fordeem_']

fordêmedlic _to be condemned_, GD 208^9.

fordêmednes f. _condemnation, proscription_, BH 34^5, GD 345^3.

fordêmend m. _accuser_, JnL p5^9.

fordêmian = fordêman

fordêming f. _plunder, spoliation_, OEG 3149.

fordemman _to dam up, block up_, #EPs# 57^5.

fordettan (#KGl#) = fordyttan

fordîcigan _to shut out by a ditch, block up_, CP.

for-dilgian, -dilegian, -diligian _to blot out, destroy, abolish_, _BH_.
['_fordilghe_']

fordimmian _to obscure, darken_, _Sc_. ['_fordim_']

fordittan = fordyttan

fordôn anv. _to undo, bring to nought, ruin, destroy_, _BH_; AO, Æ:
_abolish_, _Chr_: _kill_, Æ, AO: _corrupt, seduce, defile_. pp. fordôn
_corrupt, wicked, abandoned_. ['_fordo_']

fordr¯æfan _to drive, compel_, LL 24[62].

fordrencan (æ) _to make drunk, intoxicate_, _Æ_. ['_fordrench_'] pp.
fordruncen _drunk_, _CP_. ['_fordrunken_']

fordrîfan^1 _to drive, sweep away_: _drive on, impel, compel_, AO:
_drive away, expel_, Æ. [_Ger._ vertreiben]

fordrifnes f. _objection, opposition_, NG.

fordrincan^3 _to make drunk, be drunk_, CP.

fordrûgian _to become dry, wither_, _Met_. ['_fordry_']

fordrûwian = fordrûgian

forduttan (#VPs#) = fordyttan

fordwilman _to confound_, #Bo# 14^5.

fordwînan^1 _to vanish_, _Æ_. ['_fordwine_']

fordyslic _very foolish_, #Bo# 42^10.

fordyttan (e, i, u) _to obstruct, block up, close_, _Cp_; Æ.
['_fordit_']

fore I. prep. w. d. a. (local) _before, in the sight of, in presence
of_, _B_: (causal) _because of, for the sake of, through, on account of,
by reason of, from_, _BH_: (temporal) _before_, _Cr_: _for, instead of_.
II. adv. _before, beforehand, formerly, once_, _Ps_. ['_fore_']

fore- occly. = for-

foreald (y^2) _very old_, RB 114^11.

forealdian _to grow old, decay_, _BH_; Æ, CP. ['_forold_']

foreâstreccan _to lay low, overthrow_, #EPs# 105^26.

foreâð m. _preliminary oath_, _LL_ (v. 2·546). ['_foreoath_']

forêaðe _very easily_, Æ.

fore-bêacen, -bêacn (Æ), -bêcen n. _sign, portent, prodigy_.

forebegân _to intercept_, #Chr# 1009#e#.

foreberan _to prefer_, BH 294^7.

forebêtan _to make legal amends (vicariously)_, LL.

forebirig = forebyrig, ds. of foreburh.

forebiscop m. _high priest_, MtL 1^18 (mg).

forebisegian _to preoccupy_, OEG 1236.

forebl¯æsting (ê) f. _shoot, branch_, #EPs# 79^12.

fôrebôc (#HGl# 454) = fôrbôc

forebod n. _prophecy, preaching_, NG.

foreboda m. _forerunner, messenger_, ANS 84^14.

forebodian _to announce, declare_.

forebodung f. _prophecy_, NG.

forebr¯ædan _to prolong_, #EPs# 119^5: _overshadow_, MkL 9^7.

forebrêost n. _chest_, WW.

foreburh f. _outwork_: _outer court, vestibule_, Æ.

forebyrd f. _longsuffering_, CP 41^17.

forebysen f. _example_.

foreceorfan^3 '_præcidere_,' #ÆGr# 172^4.

foreceorfend m. _front tooth_, WW 264^11.

forecêosan _to chose in preference_, #BCJRPs# 131^13,14.

foreclipian (y) '_proclamare_,' BHy 3^4; ANS 122·265.

forecnêowrisn _progeny_, #EPs#.

forecostigan _to profane_, #EPs# 88^32.

forecostung f. _profanation_, #EPs# 88^35.

forecuman^4 _to come before, prevent_, _BH_: _overcome_? _Ps_: _come
out, come upon_, NG. ['_forecome_']

forecweðan^5 _to preach, predict_.

forecweden _aforesaid_, GD 12; 344.

forecwide m. _prophecy_: _introduction, heading (of chapter)_, NG.

forecyme m. _proceeding forth_, MtL p4^3.

fore-cynren, -cynrêd n. _progeny_.

forecýðan _to make known to_, TC 300^24: '_pronuntiare_,' #EPs# 70^15.

fored = forod

fore-dyre, -dere n. _vestibule_, OEG (T. 135).

foredyrstig? '_presumptuosus_,' LL 409[22].

forefæger _very fair_, ES 8·479^89.

fore-feng, fong = forfang

forefêran _to go before_.

forefex n. _forelock_, OEG 5326; 2^453.

forefôn^7 _to prevent, anticipate_.

foregân anv., foregangan^7 _to go before, precede_, _BH, VPs_: _go in
front of, project_: _excel_. ['_forego_']

forege- = for(e)-

foregearwung f. _preparation, parasceve_.

foregebiddan^5 _to intercede_, RB 62^8.

foregehât n. _vow_, ÆL 23b^543.

foregehâtan _to promise_: _invite_, NG.

foregenga m. _forerunner_: _predecessor, ancestor_, CP: _attendant_,
#Jud# 127.

foregengel (for-) m. _predecessor_, #Chr# 963#e#.

foregescêaw- = forescêaw-

foregesecgan _to predestine_, MtL p1^9.

foregesettan = foresettan

foregeswuteliende '_indagande_,' OEG 1504.

foregetêon^2 _to point out_, #HGl# 411.

foregeðingian = foreðingian

foregidd n. _proverb_, JnR 16^29.

foregielpan^3 _to vaunt_, AO.

foregîsl m. _preliminary hostage_ (Swt); _foremost hostage_ (BT),
#Chr# 878.

foreglêaw _foreseeing, provident, wise, prudent_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

foregyrnan _to show before_, #Sc# 203^17.

forehâlig _very holy_, ANS 84·3.

forehûs n. _porch_, LV 33.

forehýran _to hear of_, #Bl#.

foreiernend m. _forerunner_, WW 339^6.

forelâd-têow, -twa m. _precursor_, LkLR 22^26.

forel¯ædan _to lead forth_, MtL 15^14.

forel¯ærend m. _teacher_, #Bl# 149^13.

forelâr f. _preaching_, MtL p16^5.

forelcian _to delay_, NC 288.

foreldan = forieldan

forelegnis = forlegis

forelêoran _to go before, pass by_, NG.

forelêornes f. _'prævaricatio,' transgression_, #EPs# 100^3
(cp. ofer-l.).

forelocc m. '_forelock_,' _OEG_.

forelôcian '_prospicere, respicere, aspicere_,' #EPs#.

forem¯ære _illustrious, renowned, famous_, Æ.

forem¯ærlic _eminent_, #Bo# 75^24.

forem¯ærnes f. _eminence, fame_, #Bo#.

foremanian _to forewarn_, BH 412^30.

foremanig _very many_, MtL p18^12.

foremeahtig = foremihtig

foremearcod _before-mentioned_, CM 378.

foremearcung (e^2) f. _title, chapter_, NG.

foremihtig (ea) _very strong, most mighty_. adv. -lîce.

fôremunt m. _promontory_, WW 464^17.

forene = forane

forenyme m. _taking before_, #Gl#.

forerîm m. _prologue_.

forerynel m. _forerunner, herald, morning star_, Æ, CP.

foresacan^6 _to forbid_, MtL 3^14.

fores¯æd _aforesaid_, _Æ_. ['_foresaid_']

fore-sægdnes, -saga f. _preface_, NG.

foresændan = foresendan

forescêawere (for-) m. '_provisor_,' ES 39·327.

forescêawian _to 'foreshow,' foresee_, Æ: _pre-ordain, decree, appoint_,
Æ: _provide, furnish with_, _Æ_.

forescêawodlîce _with forethought, thoughtfully_, CM 76.

forescêawung f. _contemplation, foresight, providence_, _Sc_; Æ.
['_foreshowing_']

forescêotan^2 (for-) _to anticipate, forestall_, #Bo# 124^11.

forescieldnes f. '_protectio_,' #EPs# 120^5.

forescyttels m. _bolt, bar_, #Cr# 312.

foresêcan _to appeal (for justice)_, LL 152[3] and nn.

foresecgan _to mention before_, Æ: _foretell_, _BH_; Æ.

foreseld n. _first seat_, MtL 23^6.

foresellan _to spend, advance (money)_.

foresendan _to send before_.

foresêon^5 _to 'foresee,'_ _Ps_: _provide_, BH: _provide for_, BH.

foresêond m. _provider_, BH 338^10.

foresêones _foresight, providence_, BH.

fore-setnes, -setenes f. _proposition, purpose_: _preposition_, #ÆGr#.

foresettan _to place before, shut in_, _VPs_: _propose_: _prefer_:
_precede_. ['_foreset_']

foresingend m. _precentor_, WW 129^21.

foresittan^5 _to preside over_, BH.

fore-smêagan, -smêan _to think beforehand_.

foresnotor _very wise_, B 3163.

foresp¯æc = forespr¯æc

forespeca = forespreca

fore-spr¯æc (CP), -sprêc, -sp¯æc (WW) f. _advocacy, defence, excuse_:
_agreement, arrangement_: _preamble, preface, prologue_, Æ, CP:
_promise_. ['_forespeech_']

forespreca m. _intercessor, advocate, mediator_: _sponsor_, LL 442[I].

foresprecan^5 _to speak or answer for, be surety for, intercede for_,
CP: _say before_. foresprecen _above-mentioned, aforesaid_, _Bo_: =
forspecan. ['_forespoken_']

forestæppan (Æ) = foresteppan

forestæppend m. _precursor_, Lk 22^26.

forestæppung f. _anticipation_, A 8·331.

forestandan^6 _to preside, lead_: _excel_, WW 464^15.

forestapul _going before_, GPH 196.

foresteall (for-) m. _intervention, hindrance (of justice)_: _ambush,
assault, offence of waylaying on the highway_, _Æ, LL_: _fine for such
an offence_: _resistance, opposition_. ['_forestall_']

forestemman _to prevent, hinder_, NG.

forestêora m. _look-out man, pilot_, WW 464^8.

foresteppan^6 (æ) _to precede, go before_, Æ: _excel_: _forestall,
prevent_.

forestigan^1 _to excel_, #ÆGr# 154^11n.

forestige m. _vestibule_, OEG 4688 and n.

forestihtian _to fore~ordain_, Æ.

forestihtung f. _predestination_, Æ.

foreswerian^6 _to swear before_, Æ.

foretâcn n. _'fore-token,' prognostic, prodigy, sign, wonder_, _Bo_; CP.

foretâcnian _to foreshow_, BH 216^17.

foreteohhung f. _predestination_, #Bo#.

foretêon _to fore-ordain, frame beforehand, arrange_.

foretêð mp. _front teeth_, _WW_. ['_foretooth_']

foretîg m. _forecourt, porch_, Mt 11^16.

foretýnd _shut in_, BH 386^2.

foreðanc m. _forethought, providence, consideration, deliberation_, CP.

foreðanclic _thoughtful, careful, prudent_, CP. adv. -lîce.

foreðancol _provident, prudent, considerate_, CP.

foreðancolnes f. _prudence_, #PPs# 48^3.

foreðencan _to premeditate, consider, be mindful_, CP. ['_forethink_']

foreðingere m. _intercessor, mediator_, Æ.

foreðingian _to plead for any one, intercede, defend_.

foreðingiend m. _intercessor_.

fore-ðingr¯æden, -ðingung f. _intercession_, Æ.

foreðonc == foreðanc

forewall = foreweall

foreward = foreweard

forewarnian _to take warning beforehand_.

foreweall m. _rampart, bulwark_, _Ex_. ['_forewall_']

foreweard (a^2, e^2) I. f. _condition, bargain, agreement, treaty,
assurance_. II. m. _outpost, scout_. III. adj. _'forward,' inclined to
the front_, _Æ, BH_: _fore, early, former_, Æ. f. gêar _new year_. IV.
adv. (-wearde at AS 55^4) _in front_, CP: _towards the future_, _Gen_.
fram foreweardum _once more_, RB.

foreweorðan^3 _to predestinate_, MkL p1^20.

fore-wesan anv. pret. 3 sg. -wæs _to be over, rule over_, BH.

forewîs _foreknowing_, HL 18^363.

forewitan swv. _to foreknow_, _Bo_. ['_forewit_']

forewîtegian _to prophesy_, Æ.

forewîtegung f. _prophecy_, OEG.

forewitig _foreknowing_, Æ.

forewitol _foreknowing_, #Chr# 1067#d#.

forewittlendlic _prescient_, OEG 1502.

forewitung f. _foreknowing, presage_.

foreword = foreweard

forewost (e^3) m. _chief, captain_, NG.

forewrêgan = forwrêgan

forewrîtan^1 _to proscribe, banish_. forewriten _above or
before-written_, CM 276^540.

forewritennes f. _proscription, exile_, WW 466^5.

forewyrcend m. _servant_, ÆL 3^156.

forewyrd f. _predestination_, #Gl#.

forfang (forefeng) m. _capture_, _(legal) seizure, recovery of cattle or
other property_, _LL_: _reward for rescuing properly_, _LL_ (v. 388-391
and 2·279). ['_forfang_']

forfangfeoh n. _reward for rescuing cattle or other property_. [LL 390,
3, 2]

forfaran^6 _to pass away, perish_, #Chr#: _lose, destroy, ruin_:
_intercept, obstruct_.

forfeng I. pret. 3 sg. of forfôn. II. = forfang

forfêran (Æ) = forðfêran

forferian _to let die_, LL 58[17].

forflêon^2 _to flee from, escape, avoid, evade_, Æ.

forflýgan _to put to flight_, ZDA 31·16^418.

forfôn^7 _to seize_: _anticipate, forestall_: _surprise_: _prevent_:
_forfeit_.

forfyllan _to stop up, obstruct_, WW 463^10.

forg- = foreg-

forg¯ægan _to transgress, trespass, prevaricate_, Æ: _pass by, omit,
neglect_, OEG, W.

forg¯ægednes f. _transgression, trespass_, Æ.

forg¯ægung f. _fault, excess_, #Sc# 115^9.

forg¯ælan _to avoid_, LkL.

forgân I. anv. _to go or pass over, by or away_, _Æ, MtL_: _'forgo,'
abstain from, neglect, lose_, _Æ_; CP, Æ. II. = foregân

forgedôn = fordôn

forgeearnung f. _merit_, DHy 132^1.

forgefenes = forgiefnes

forgêgan = forg¯ægan

forgeldan = forgieldan

forgêm- = forgîm-, forgîem-

forgeorne _very earnestly, very attentively_, #Bl#.

forget = forgiet pres. 3 sg. of forgietan.

forgiefan^5 (i, y) _to give, grant, allow_; _BH, Bl_; CP: _'forgive,'
overlook_, _Gen, Lk, Mt_; AO, CP: _give up, leave off_, CP: _give in
marriage_.

forgiefnes (i, y) f. _pardon_, _'forgiveness,' remission_, _Bl_; CP:
_indulgence, permission_, _BH_ (i): _gift_? #Cr# 425.

forgieldan^3 (e, i, y) _to pay for_, CP: _requite, reward_, _Bl_; AO,
CP: _indemnify, make good_: _pay double (as penalty)_, LL: _give_.
['_foryield_']

forgielpan^3 _to boast in public, trumpet forth_, W 234^16.

forgîemelêasian (î, ý) _to neglect, abandon, give up, omit_, CP.

forgietan^5 (i, y) w. a. or g. _to 'forget,'_ _B, Ma, Ps_; AO, CP. For
comps. v. forgit-.

forgif- = forgief-

for-gifenlic, -gifendlic _that may be forgiven_, _Mt_: _dative_, #ÆGr#
22^16 (y^2). ['_forgivelich_']

forgifestre f. _female giver_, DHy 49^6.

forgifu f. '_gratia_,' DHy 78^7.

forgifung f. _gift_.

forgildan = forgieldan

forgîman (ê, ý) _to neglect, pass by, transgress_, _B_ (ê).
['_foryeme_']

forgîmelêasian = forgîemelêasian

forgitan = forgietan

forgitel (eo^2, y^2, o^3, u^3) _forgetful_, _Æ_. ['_forgetel_']

forgitelnes (y^2) f. _forgetfulness, oblivion_, _LPs_.

forgiten pp. _forgetting_: _forgetful_.

forgiting f. _forgetfulness_, CM 1065.

forglendr-an, -ian _to devour, swallow up_, W.

forgnagan^6 _to eat up_, _Æ_. ['_forgnaw_']

forgnîdan^1 _to grind together, dash down, crush, break_, _LPs_.
['_forgnide_']

forgniden _contrite_.

forgnidennes f. _tribulation_, #LPs# 13^3; #APs# 146^3.

forgnýdan = forgnîdan

forgrindan^3 _to grind down, ruin, destroy, consume_.

forgrindet n. _grinding, pounding_, Cp 776#c#.

forgrîpan^1 _to seize, assail, attack, overwhelm_.

forgrôwen _grown up_? _overgrown_? _Rim_ 46. [v. '_forgrow_']

forgumian (LL 474, 2) = forgîman

forgyf- = forgief-, forgif-

forgyldan = forgieldan

forgyltan _to sin, be or become guilty_, W. forgylt _condemned, guilty_.

forgým- = forgîm-, forgîem-

forgyrd = forðgyrd

forgyrdan _to enclose, encircle_.

forgyt- = forgiet-, forgit-

for-habban, pret. 3 sg. -hæfde _to hold in, restrain, retain, keep
back_: _draw back, refrain from, avoid_, Æ. forhæfed _continent,
abstemious_.

forhæbbenda m. _abstinent, continent person_, CP.

forh¯æfd = forhêafod

forhæf(e)dnes f. _temperance, continence, self-restraint, abstinence_,
_BH_; Æ, CP: _parsimony_. ['_forhevedness_']

forh¯æðed _burnt up_.

forhâtan^7 _to renounce, forswear_, _Æ_. ['_forhight_'] se forhâtena
_the devil_, _Gen_ 609.

forhêafdnes (AS 22^16) = forh¯æfednes  [[headword spelled "forhæfednes"]]

forhêafod n. _'forehead,' brow, skull_, _WW_; Æ. [= fore-]

forhealdan^7 _to forsake, fall away from, rebel against_, _B_: _defile,
pollute_, #Bl#: _keep back, withhold_, LL 130, 6, 1: _misuse, abuse_.
['_forhold_']

forhealdnes f. _unchastity_, NC 288.

forheard _very hard_, #Ma# 156.

forheardian _to grow hard_, #LVPs# 89^6.

forhêawan^7 _to hew in pieces, cut down, kill_, _Ma_. ['_forhew_']

forhefednes = forhæfednes

forhegan (#KGl#) = forhogian

forhelan^4 _to cover over, conceal, hide, protect_, _Æ, Bo_; CP.
sacne f. _conceal a guilty man_. ['_forhele_']

for-hellan? -hellian _to hide_, OEG 5410n.

forhergend m. _ravager_, #Gl#.

for-hergian, -herigean, -heregian _to plunder, harry, ravage, devastate,
destroy_, AO, CP. [_Ger._ verheeren]

for-hergung, -her(g)iung f. _harassing, devastation_, AO 74^36.

forhicgan = forhycgan

forhîenan _to cast down, defeat, humiliate, humble, outrage, oppress,
waste_, AO. [_Ger._ verhöhnen]

forhigan = forhycgan

for-hoged-, -hogd- = forhogod-

forhogian _to neglect, disregard, despise_, _BH_; Æ, CP. ['_forhow_']

forhogiend m. _despiser_.

forhogodlic _contemptuous_, #Bl# 77^23. adv. -lîce.

forhogodnes f. _contempt_.

forhogung f. _contempt_, #BPs#, CM.

forhohnes = forhogodnes

forhradian _to hasten before, prevent, anticipate, frustrate_, Æ, CP.

forhraðe _very speedily, quickly, soon_, Æ.

forhrêred _annulled_, WW.

forht _afraid, timid, cowardly_, AO, CP: _frightful, terrible_. adv.
forhte _despairingly_.

forhtful _fainthearted, timorous_.

±forhtian (tr. and intr.) _to be afraid, surprised, fear, dread_, Æ.

forhtiendlic _timorous_, WW 442^5.

forhtige _humbly, submissively_, RB 70^5.

forhtigend _timid_, W: _dreadful_, W.

forhtlic _fearful, afraid_. adv. -lîce.

forhtmôd _timorous, timid_, Æ.

forhtnes f. _fear, terror_, Æ.

forhtung f. _fear_, Æ.

forhugian = forhogian

forhwæn, forhwan = forhwon

forhweorfan^3 _to come to an end, be destroyed_.

forhwerfan = forhwierfan

for-hwî, -hwig = forhwý

forhwierfan (e, eo, i, y) _to change, transform_: _remove, transfer_:
_pervert_, CP.

forhwon _wherefore, why, for what reason_.

forhwý (î^2) _why, wherefore_, _Ps_. ['_forwhy_']

forhwyrfan = forhwierfan

forhwyrfedlic _perverse_, #Bl# 31^4.

forhwyrfednes f. _perversity_, NC 288.

forhycgan _to disdain, despise, reject_, CP.

forhýdan _to hide_, _Ps_; CP. ['_forhide_']

forhygdelic _despised_, #LPs# 118^141.

forhylman _to refuse obedience to_, #An# 735.

forhýnan = forhîenan

forhyrdan (i) _to harden_, #EPPs# 94^8. [heard]

forieldan _to put off, delay_, CP.

foriernan^3 _to run before, outrun_, _Jn_ 20^4 (fore- _JnL_).
['_forerun_']

forinlîce _thoroughly, exceedingly_, #Bo# 94^6.

forinweardlîce _thoroughly, genuinely_, #Bo# 137^15.

forlâcan^7 ¶ _to mislead, seduce, deceive, betray_.

forl¯ædan _to mislead, seduce_, Æ, AO, CP: _bring out_ (= forð-), Æ.
[_Ger._ verleiten]

forl¯æran _to teach wrongly, lead astray, seduce, pervert_, _An_; Æ.
['_forlere_']

forl¯ætan^7 _to let go, relinquish, surrender, lose, leave, abandon,
neglect_, _An, Bl_; Æ, CP: _remit, pardon, excuse_: _loose, release_:
_let, permit, allow_, _BH_: _grant, give_. ûp, in f. _to direct upwards,
within_. ân(n)e f. = ân- forl¯ætan. ['_forlet_']

forlætednes (GD 227^16) = forlætennes
  [[headword spelled "forl¯ætennes"]]

for-l¯ætennes (Æ), -l¯ætnes, -l¯æting f. _leaving, departure, absence_:
_loss, perdition_: _intermission, cessation, end_: _remission_.

forl¯æting f. _intermission_.

forlegenes = forlegnes

forlegenlic _mean-looking, ugly_.

forlegere = forligere

for-legis, -leges f. _prostitute, adulteress_, CP.

for-legis-, -legor- = forliger-

forlegnes f. _fornication_.

forlêogan^2 _to lie, perjure oneself, slander_, Æ.

forlêoran (#EPs# 143^14) = forelêoran

forleornung f. _deception_, #Bl# 183^34.

forleorte redupl. pret. sg. of forl¯ætan.

forlêosan^2 _to lose, abandon, let go_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _destroy, ruin_,
_Gen_. forloren _ruined_. ['_forlese_']

forlêt- = forl¯æt-

forlettan (fore-) _to prevent_, MkL 10^14.

forlicgan^5 _to commit adultery or fornication_, _AO_; CP: _fail,
lapse_, LL 178[7]: _screen (a thief)_, LL 274[12]. ['_forlie_'] pp.
forlegen used as sb. _adulterer, fornicator_.

forlicgend m. _fornicator_.

forlîden pp. of forlîðan.

forlidennes = forliðennes

forligan = forlicgan

for-ligenes, -lignes = forlegnes

forliger I. n. _adultery, fornication, wantonness, immorality_, Æ. II.
m. _whoremonger, adulterer_, Æ: _fornicatress_? III. adj. _adulterous_.

forligerbed n. _bed of fornication_.

forligere = forliger I.

forligeren adj. _fornicating_, OEG 8^232.

forligerhûs n. _house of ill fame_, OEG.

forligerlic _unchaste, impure_, OEG.

forligerwîf (-ego) n. _prostitute_, MH 140^19.

forliges = forlegis

forliggang m. _house of ill-fame_? _fornication_? WW 499^12.

forligrian _to commit fornication_, #ERSPs# 72^26.

forlîr = forliger II.

forlîðan^1 _to suffer shipwreck_.

forliðennes f. _shipwreck_, OEG.

for-long, -longe adv. _long ago_, NG.

forlor m. _loss, destruction_, AO, CP. tô forlore gedôn _to
destroy_, CP.

forlorenes f. _state of being forlorn, perdition, destruction_, _VPs_.
['_forlornness_']

for-lorian, -losian _to lose_, NG.

forlustlîce _very willingly_, #Bo# 51^18.

forlytel _very little_, #Bo#.

form = feorm

form- (NG) = frum-

forma (eo) _first, earliest_, _Bo_; CP. ['_forme_'] on forman _at
first_.

for-m¯æl, -mâl f? n? _negotiation, agreement, treaty_, LL. [m¯æl II.]

form¯ærnes = forem¯ærnes

formanig _very many_.

formelle f. _bench_, ANS 84·9. [_L._ formella]

formeltan^3 (y) _to melt away, dissolve, liquefy, burn up_, _AO_; Æ.
['_formelt_']

formesta = fyrmesta wk. superl. of forma.

fôrmete m. _food for a journey_.

formicel (y^2) _very great_, LL 302[20,2].

formogod _corrupted_, ÆL 23^375.

formolsnian _to rot away, crumble, decay_, Æ.

formolsnung f. _corruption_, OEG 1251.

formycel = formicel

formyltan = formeltan

formyrðrian _to murder_, LL, W.

forn = foran

fôrn f? m? _trout_, WW 180^39.

forn¯æman _to be worn out, afflicted (with grief)_, GD 245^3.

forne = foran adv.

fôrne f. = fôrn

fornêah _very nearly, well-nigh, almost, about_, Æ, AO, CP.

for-nêan (Æ), -nêh, -nêon = fornêah

Fornêtes folm _a plant_, #Lcd# (v. BT).

fornêðan _to expose to danger, sacrifice_, AO 222^1.

forniman^4 _to take away, deprive of, plunder, waste, devastate,
destroy, consume_, _B, Lcd_; Æ, AO: _annul_: _disfigure_: _overcome_.
['_fornim_']

fornýdan _to coerce, compel_, W 158^10.

fornyman = forniman

fornyrwan _to oppress_, ANS 128·57.

fornytlic _very useful_, GD 174^20.

forod _broken down, worn out, useless, void, abortive_, Æ, AO, CP.

foroft _very often_.

forp¯æran _to turn away, lose, spoil, pervert, destroy_, Æ, CP.

forpyndan ¶ _to do away, remove_.

fôrracu f. _itinerary_, OEG 7^121.

forradian = forhradian

forr¯æda? m. _traitor, plotter_, MP 1·592.

forr¯ædan _to plot against, betray_, _W_: _condemn_: _injure_.
['_forrede_']

forraðe _very soon_, Æ.

forrepen _taken_, JnL p5^8.

forrîdan^1 _to intercept by riding before_, #Chr# 894#a#.

forrîdel m. _fore-rider, forerunner, messenger_, _Æ_. ['_forridel_']

forrotednes (a^3, o^3) f. _corrupt matter, rottenness_, Æ.

forrotian _to rot away, decay_, _CP, WW_; Æ. ['_forrot_']

forrynel = forerynel

forsacan^6 _to object to, reject, oppose, deny, refuse_, _AO, Cp, LL_:
_give up, renounce_, AO, CP. ['_forsake_']

forsacennes f. _denial_, A 11·386^383.

forsacung f. _denial_, NC 288.

fors¯æcan = forsêcan

fors¯ætian _to lay wait for, beset, surround_, AO 146^10.

fors¯ætnian (ê) _to hedge in, beset_, #ERPs# 21^17.

forsæwestre = forsewestre

forsawen = forsewen

forsc m. '_frog_,' _Æ_ (frox); #Gl#.

forscâd- = forscêad-

forscæncednes (#LPs# 40^10) = forscrencednes

forscamian _to be ashamed_ (impers. w. a.), _CP_. ['_forshame_']

forscamung f. _modesty_, GPH 390.

forscapung (AO) = forsceapung

forscêadan^7 _to scatter, disperse_, CP: _damn, condemn_? #Gu# 449 (GK).

forsceamian = forscamian

forsceap n. _evil deed_? #Gen# 898.

forsceapung f. _misdeed, crime, fault_.

forscêaw- = forescêaw-

forscending f. _confusion_, LkR 21^25.

forsceorfan^3 _to gnaw off, bite, eat up_, AO 226^9.

forscêotan = forescêotan

forsceppan = forscieppan

forsceta _waterfall_, OET 575; MF 434.

forscieppan^6 _to change, transform_, _Gen_. ['_forshape_']

forscip n. _'foreship,' prow_, _WW_.

forscræncan = forscrencan

forscrencan _to supplant, overcome, vanquish, cast down_, Æ: _dry up_,
OEG 4926.

forscrencednes (scænc-) f. _supplanting, deceit_, #LPs# 40^10.

forscrencend m. _supplanter_, Æ.

forscrîfan^1 _to decree_, #Gl#: _proscribe, condemn, doom_, Æ: (¶)
_bewitch, cast under a spell_.

forscrincan^3 (intr.) _to shrink, dry up, wither away_, _Æ_.
['_forshrink_']

forscûfan^2 _to cast down (pride)_, #Ex# 204.

forscyldigian _to condemn_. for-scyldigod, -scyldegod _guilty_, Æ.

forscyppan = forscieppan

forscyrian _to separate_, MHF 159.

forscyttan _to exclude, prevent, obviate_, Æ. ['_forshut_']

forsêarian _to sear, dry up, wither_, Æ, CP.

forseawennes = forsewennes

forsêcan I. _to afflict_. II. = foresêcan

forsecgan _to accuse falsely, slander, accuse_, Æ: _to speak about,
discourse on_.

forsegenes f. _contempt_, #VPs# 122^4.

forsegenlic (GD 233^21) = forsewenlic

forsêgon = forsâwon pret. pl. of forsêon.

forsellan _to sell_, NC 289.

forsendan _to send away, banish, send to destruction_, AO.

forsêon^5 _to overlook, neglect, scorn, despise, reject, renounce_,
_Bl_; Æ, AO, CP: _refrain from_. ['_forsee_']

forsêones f. _care_, BH 84^7.

forsêoðan^2 _to wither, consume_, Æ.

forsêrian (AS 10^4?) = forsêarian

forsêtnian = fors¯ætnian

forsettan I. _to hedge in, obstruct_, _BH_. ['_forset_'] II. =
foresettan

forsettednes = foresetnes

forsewen pp. of forsêon.  [[from first edition]]

forsewenlic _despicable, ignominious, wretched, of poor appearance_.
adv. -lîce, Æ.

forsewennes f. _contempt_, Æ, AO.

forsewestre (æ^2) f. _female despiser_, OEG 4430.

forsingian = forsyngian

forsittan^5 _to neglect, delay_, _LL_: _block, obstruct, besiege_, AO:
_injure_: _absent oneself (from)_. ['_forsit_']

forsîð = forðsîð

forsîðian _to perish_, B 1550.

for-sl¯æwan, -slâwian _to be slow, unwilling, delay, put off_, _Bo_; CP.
['_forslow_']

forslêan^6 _to cut through, strike, break, kill, destroy_, AO.

forslegenlic _mean, ignominious_ (= forleg- ?).

forsliet m. _slaughter_, WW 28^18. [slieht]

forslîtan _to consume, devour_, #PPs# 77^46.

forsmorian _to smother, suffocate, choke, stifle_, Æ.

forsorgian _to despond_, W 69^16.

forsôð _indeed, verily_, _Bo_. ['_forsooth_']

forsp¯æc = forespr¯æc

forspanan^6 _to mislead, lead astray, seduce, entice_, _Æ_; CP.
['_forspan_']

forspaning f. _allurement_, OEG.

forspeca = forespreca

forspecan^5 _to speak in vain_: _deny_.

forspêdian _to speed, prosper_.

forspendan _to spend, give out, squander, consume_, _AO_. ['_forspend_']

forspennen (OEG 612) = forspenning

forspennend m. _procurer_, #ÆGr# 36^11.

forspenn-ende, -endlic _seductive, voluptuous, defiling_, OEG.

forspennestre f. _procuress_, #ÆGr# 36^12.

forspenning f. _enticement, seduction, evil attraction_, Æ.

forspild m. _destruction_, CP 294^19.

for-spildan (CP) -spillan (_AO_) _to waste, lose, disperse, bring to
nothing, destroy, ruin, kill_. ['_forspill_']

forspillednes f. _waste, destruction, perdition_, Æ.

forsprec- = foresprec-

forspyll- = forspill-

forspyrcan _to dry up_, #PPs# 101^3.

forst (frost) m. '_frost_,' _Ph, Rd_. [frêosan]

forstæppan = forestæppan  [[under "foresteppan"]]

forstal (_LL_) = foresteall

forstalian (refl.) _to steal away_, LL.

forstandan^2 _to defend, help, protect_, _LL_: _withstand, prevent,
hinder, resist, oppose_, _Met_: _benefit, avail_, CP: _understand_,
_Bo_; CP: _signify, be equal to_, EC, LL. ['_forstand_']

forsteall = foresteall

forstelan^4 _to steal away, steal, rob, deprive_, _MtR, LL_; Æ.
['_forsteal_']

forstig '_frosty_,' _BH_ (y); Æ.

forstlic _glacial, frozen_, WW 175^16.

forstoppian _to stop up, close_, #Lcd# 15b.

forstrang _very strong_, #Rd# 51^4.

forstrogdnes f. '_precipitatio_,' NC 289.

forstyltan _to be amazed_, MkLR.

forstyntan _to blunt, break, crush_, WW 375^5.

forsûcan^2, forsûgan^2 _to suck out, empty_.

for-sugian (Æ, AO), -suwian (Æ) = for-swigian

forsuwung f. _silence_, OEG 2085.

forsw¯ælan _to burn, burn up, inflame, consume_, _Æ_. ['_forsweal_']

forswæð (DHy 38^16) = fôtswæð

forswâpan^7 ¶ _to sweep away, drive off_.

forswarung f. _perjury_, NC 289.

forswefian '_prosperare_,' #EPs# 117^25.

forswelan^4 _to burn, burn up_.

forswelgan^3 _to swallow up, devour, consume, absorb_, _B_; Æ, CP.
['_forswallow_']

forsweltan^3 _to die_.

forsweogian = forswigian

forsweolgan = forswelgan

forsweorcan^3 _to grow dark, obscure_.

forsweorfan^3 _to polish, cleanse_: _grind away, demolish_.

forsweotole _very clearly_, ES 18·333; 43·162.

forswerian^6 (refl. and intr.) _to swear falsely_, _Æ, LL_: _renounce on
oath_, _B_. ['_forswear_']

forswigian _to conceal by silence, suppress, pass over_, Æ, CP: _be
silent_.

forswîtan^1 _to impair_, TC 584^5.

forswîð _very great_, #Creat# 26.

forswîðan, forswîðian _to crush, press upon, overcome, repress_, CP.

forswîðe adv. _very much, utterly_, #Bo#.

forsworcenlic _dark, obscure_, DHy 24.

forsworcennes f. _darkening, darkness_, Æ, W.

forsworen (pp. of forswerian) _'forsworn,' perjured_, _Æ, Chr_.

forsworennes f. _perjury_, _Æ_. ['_forswornness_']

for-swugian (CP), -sygian = forswigian

forsyngian (i) _to sin greatly_. ['_forsin_'] forsyngod m. _sinner_,
_LL_.

fortâcen = foretâcn

fortendan _to burn away, cauterize, sear_, AO 46^14.

fortêon^2 _to mislead, seduce_, _Cr_: _draw over, cover, obscure_.
['_foretee_']

fortiht- = fortyht-

for-timbran, -timbrian _to close up, obstruct_.

fortogenes f. _griping, spasm_, #Lcd# 89a.

fortredan^5 _to tread down, trample on_, _Æ_; CP. ['_fortread_']

fortreding f. _treading down, crushing_, #Sc# 95^10.

fortrendan _to block (by rolling a stone)_, v. OEG 114.

fortrûgadnes, fortrûwednes = fortrûwodnes

fortrûwian _to be presumptuous, over-confident, rash_, CP.

fortrûwodnes f. _presumption_, CP.

fortrûwung f. _presumption_, #Bo# 9^7.

fortrymman _to testify, confirm_, NG.

fortyhtan _to seduce_, #El# 208.

fortyhtigend m. _polluter, defiler_, OEG 3337.

fortyllan _to seduce_, #Cr# 270.

fortymbrian = fortimbran

fortýnan _to shut in, enclose, block up_, CP.

forð adv. _'forth,' forwards, onwards, further_, _A, B, BH, Ct_: _hence,
thence_: _away_, _Æ_: (time) _continually, still, continuously,
henceforth, thenceforward_, _B, Ep_: _simultaneously_. f. mid ealle
_forthwith_. f. on _continually_. fram orde oð ende f. _from the
beginning to the end_. f. ðæt _until_.

forð- (N) = furð-

forða = forð¯æm

forðâcîgan _to call forth_, BH 444^24.

forðâdilgian _to bring to nothing, blot out_, MFH 160.

forð¯æm, forðâm, forðan (CP), forðon (AO, CP) I. conj. _for (the reason)
that, owing to (the fact) that, for, because, on that account,
therefore, seeing that_. for ð¯æm ðe, etc. with same signification. II.
adv. _for that cause, consequently, therefore_.

forðâgoten _poured forth_, ÆL 23b^798.

forðahting (= eaht-) f. _exhortation_.

forðancful _very thankful_, ES 18·336; 43·162.

forðâtêon^2 _to bring forth, produce_, Æ. pp. forðâtogen.

forðâurnen ptc. _elapsed_, BH 280^21.

forðb¯ære _productive_, #Gen# 132.

forðbecuman^4 _to come forth_.

forðberan^4 _to bring forth, produce_, _BH_; Æ. ['_forthbear_']

forðbesêon^5 _to look forth_, #LPs# 101^20.

forðbl, forðbie prep. _by, past_, CP 197^13.

forðbigferende _passer by_, NC 343.

forðbl¯æstan _to blow forth, burst out_, WW 393^33.

forðblâwan^7 _to blow forth, belch forth_, WW 397^10.

forðboren _of noble birth_.

forð-brengan, -bringan _to bring forth, produce_, _Bl, Lk_: _bring to
pass, accomplish_: _bring forward_: _adduce, quote_, Æ.

forðbylding f. _emboldening, encouragement_, #Chr# 999#e#.

forðclypian _to call forth_. ['_forthclepe_']

forðcuman^4 _to come forth, proceed, arrive at, succeed_: _come to pass,
come true_: _be born_.

forðcyme m. _coming forth, birth_, _Æ_. ['_forthcome_']

forðcýðan _to announce, declare_, #CVPs# 118^26.

forðdôn _to put forth_, _BH_. ['_forthdo_']

forðearle _very much, greatly_, Æ.

forðearlîce _absolutely, entirely_, RB 11^19.

forðelgian (#KGl#) = forðyld(g)ian

forðencan (æ) _to mistrust, despise, despair_, _Ps_. pp. forðôht
_despaired of_; as sb. _poor wretch_, Æ: _reflect_, DHy 138^8.
['_forthink_']

forðêofan _to steal_.

forðêon I. (sv^1,2) _to surpass, excel_, RB 131^19. II. _to crush,
oppress_, #Rood# 54.

forðêostrian (îe) _to darken_, #LPs# 104^28.

forðfæder m. _'forefather,' ancestor_, _Æ_.

forðfaran^6 _to depart, die_, _Bo, Chr_; Æ. ['_forthfare_']

±forðfêran _to depart, die_, Æ.

forð-fêrednes, -fêring f. _death_.

forðflôwan _to flow_, BH 418^21.

forðfolgian _to follow_, CM 1052.

forðfôr I. f. _departure, death_, _BH_. ['_forthfore_'] II. pret. 3 sg.
of forðfaran.

forðforl¯ætenes f. _licence_, #Bo# 12^2.

forðframian _to grow to maturity_, WW 465^10.

forðfromung f. _departure_, #CVPs# 104^38.

forðfyligan _to follow, fall out, happen_, CM 1109.

forðgân anv., pret. 3 sg. -êode _to go forth, advance, proceed, pass by,
go away, go on, precede, succeed_, _Chr, Mk_. ['_forthgo_']

forðgang m. _going forth, progress, advance, success_: _privy, drain_:
_purging, evacuation_, ÆL 16^207.

forðgangan^7 _to go forth_, _Ma_. ['_forthgang_']

forðgecîgan _to call forth_, #REPs# 67^7: _exhort_, BH 54^15.

forðgeclipian (y) _to call forth, provoke_, #Sc, EPs#.

forðgefaran = forðfaran

forðgefêran = forðfêran

forðgel¯æstan = forðl¯æstan

forðgelang _dependent_, LL (280^12).

forðgelêoran _to pass away, die_.

forðgelêorednes f. _departure, death_, GD 282^11.

forðgelôcian (#BPs# 101^20) = forðlôcian

forðgenge _increasing, effective, successful_, Æ, CP.

forðgeong = forðgang

forðgeorn _eager to advance_, #Ma# 281.

forðgêotan^2 _to pour forth_, _BH_. ['_forthyete_']

forðgerîmed _in unbroken succession_, B 59.

forðgesceaft ¶ f. _creature, created being or thing, world_: _future
destiny_.

forðgestrangian '_confortare_,' #LPs# 68^5.

forðgesýne _visible, conspicuous_, #Cra# 1.

forðgewîtan^1 _to go forth, pass, proceed, go by_: _depart, die_.
forðgewiten tîd, tîma _past tense_, #ÆGr#.

forðgewitenes f. _departure_, #LPs# 104^38.

forðgyrd m. _fore-girdle, martingale_, WW.

forðheald _bent forward, stooping_: _inclined, steep_, RB 5^20.

forðhealdan^7 _to hold to, follow out, keep up, observe_, Æ.

forðheold I. = forðheald. II. pret. 3 sg. of forðhealdan.

forðherge m. _van (of an army)_, #Ex# 225.

forðhlîfian _to be prominent_, BH 322^24.

forðhrêosan^2 _to rush forth_, #Sc# 101^13.

forðî = forðý

±forðian _to further, advance_, _Chr_: _carry out, accomplish_, _Chr_.
['_forth_']

forðig = forðý

forðindan^3 _to swell up_, #Lcd#.

forðingian = foreðingian

forðl¯ædan _to lead forth, bring forth_, _Sat_; Æ. ['_forthlead_']

forðl¯ædnes f. _bringing forth_, BH 76^15.

forðl¯æstan _to persevere in, accomplish_.

forðl¯ætan^7 _to send forth, emit_.

forðlaðian _to invite_, #Bl#.

forðlêoran _to proceed_, BH 312^27.

forðlic _forward, advanced_, #Chr# 1066#d#.

forðlîfian = forðhlîfian

forðlôcian _to look forth_.

forðlûtan^2 _to lean forward, fall down_, #VPs#.

forðm¯ære _very glorious_, #Creat# 69.

forðman m. _man of rank_, NC 289.

forðmest _foremost_, _MtL_. ['_forthmost_']

forðolian _to go without, lack_, #Wa# 38.

forð-on (_MH_) = furðum

for-ðon = forð¯æm

forðoncol = foreðancul  [[headword spelled "foreðancol"]]

forðor = furðor

forðr¯æcan (tr.) _to push out, protrude_, ÆL 25^135.

forðr¯æsan _to rush forth, rise up_: _jut out, protrude_, #RPs# 72^7.
[r¯æsan]

forðr¯æstan (ê) _to crush, afflict, oppress_, _VPs_. ['_forthrast_']

forðr¯æstednes (ê) f. _tribulation_.

forðres- = forðrys-

forðriccednes = forðryccednes

forðrihte adv. _straightway, at once_: _unmistakably, plainly_.

forðringan _to rescue from, defend against_, B 1084: _elbow out_?
_displace_? RB 115^7.

forðryccan _to press, squeeze, crush, oppress, suppress_.

forðryccednes (i) f. _pressure, oppression_.

forðrycnes f. _extortion, oppression, tribulation_, LL; MFH 159 (fore-).

forðryne m. _onward course_, #Gen# 215.

for-ðrysman, -ðrysmian _to choke, suffocate, strangle_. [ðrosm]

forðscacan^6 _to pass away_, #RPs# 143^4.

forðscencan _to pour forth, give to drink_, WW 464^9.

forðscype m. _progress_, BH 92^14 (c).

forðsetennes f. '_propositio_,' MtR 12^4.

forðsîð m. _going forth, decease_, _Chr_; Æ, CP. ['_forthsithe_']

forðsîðian _to depart, die_, Æ.

forðsnoter (tt) ¶ _very wise_, #El#.

forðspell n. _declaration_, #Mod# 47.

forðspôwnes f. _prosperity_, BH 106^25.

forð-stæppan, -steppan^6 _to issue forth, proceed, pass by_, ÆL:
_follow_, A 8·333^32.

forðstæpping f. _advance_, DHy 80^14.

forðsyllan _to give out, pay out_, LL 175[3].

forðtêg (#KGl#) = forðtîg

forðtêon^2 _to draw forth, bring forth_.

forðtîg (e^2, y^2) m. _vestibule_, OEG 3828.

forðtihting f. _exhortation_.

forðtýg = forðtîg

forððegn m. _chief noble_, ÆL 6^125.

forððêon _to profit ('proficere')_, GD 200.

forðum = furðum

forðung f. _furtherance_, ANS 125^49.

forðweard (e^2) I. _inclined forward_: _advanced, progressing, growing,
ready_; _enduring, everlasting, continual_: _future_. adv.
_continually_, _PPs_: _prospectively_, _ÆGr_: _forwards, onwards_, W
17^8. ['_forthward_'] II. m. _look-out man, pilot_? #Gen# 1436.

forðweardes _forwards_, HL 16^203 (e).

forðweardnes f. _progress_, GD 117^19.

forðweaxan^7 _to break forth, burst forth_, GD. ['_forthwax_']

forðweg m. _journey, departure_. in (on) forðwege _away_.

forðwerd == forðweard

forðwîf n. _matron_, WW 309^44.

forðwyrft _tortured, mutilated_, v. OEG 5028.

forðý I. conj. _for that, because, therefore_, _Jn_. ['_forthy_'] II.
adv. _for that, therefore, consequently_.

for-ðyldian, -ðyld(i)gian, -ðyl(de)gian _to bear, support, endure, wait
patiently_, Æ.

forðylman ¶_to shut in, enclose, envelop, obscure, cover over,
overwhelm_: _suffocate, consume_.

forðyppan _to make manifest_, #CVPs#.

forðyrnan^3 _to run before, precede_: _continue_, Æ.

forðyrrian _to dry up_, #Lcd# 82b.

forðysmed _obscured_, WW 246^6.

forðýðe = forðý

forud = forod

for-ûtan, -ûton adv.; prep. w. d. _except, without_, _Chr_ 1122.
['_forout_']

forwærnan = forwiernan

forwærnian (WW 442^18) = forweornian

forwana m. _abundance_? CP 465^16.

forwandian _to hesitate, be reluctant_, CP: _be ashamed_.

forwandung f. _shame_, #SPs# 68^23.

forwarð = forwearð pret. 3 sg. of forweorðan.

forweard I. (NG) _beginning, front_: _heading, title, chapter_. II. adv.
_continually, always_, #Gen# 788. [?= forðweard; or foreweard, JGPh
12·257]

forweardmercung f. _heading_, JnL p3^1.

forweaxan^7 _to progress, grow too much, become overgrown_, _CP_; AO.
['_forwax_']

forweddod _pledged_. [wedd]

forwegan^5 _to kill_, #Ma# 228.

forwel adv. _very, very well_, Æ.

forwened _insolent_. [wenian]

forwêned '_suspectus_,' BDS 30·12^104. [wênan]

forwenednes f. _insolence_, ANS 79·89.

forweoren = forworen

forweornan = forwiernan

forweornian _to dry up, wither, fade, grow old, rot, decay_, Æ.

forweorpan^3 _to throw, cast out, cast down, drive off, reject, throw
away, squander_, _B_. ['_forwerpe_']

forweorpnes f. _migration_, MtL 1^17.

forweorðan^3 (y) _to perish, pass away, vanish_, _Mt_; AO, CP, Æ. f. on
môde _be grieved_. ['_forworth_']

forweorðenes = forwordenes

forweorðfullic _excellent_, #Bo# 65^15.

forweosnian = forwisnian

forwercan = forwyrcan

forwerd = foreweard

forwered = forwerod

forwerednes f. _old age_, #SPs# 70^18.

forweren (WW 217^15) = forworen

forwerennes (#RPs# 70^18) = forwerednes

forwernedlice _continently_, W 284^8. [forwiernan]

forwerod _worn out, very old_, Æ. [werian]

forwesing f. _destroying_.

forwest = forewost

forwiernan (e, eo, i, y) _to hinder, prohibit, prevent, repel, refuse,
repudiate, deny, withhold, oppose_, _AO, B_ (y); CP. ['_forwarn_']

forwird = forwyrd

forwirn- = forwiern-

forwisnian (eo) _to wither away, dry up, decay, rot_.

forwitan = forewitan

forwitolnes f. _intelligence, diligence_. [= fore-]

forwlencan _to fill with pride, puff up_, _CP_. ['_forwlench_']

forword I. n. _iota_, MtL 5^18. II. = foreweard

forwordenes f. _destruction, failure_.

forwordenlic _perishable_, W 263^13.

forworen (pp. of *forweosan) _decrepit, decayed_, OEG 2109.

forworhta = forwyrhta

forwracned _banished_, RB 82^2.

forwrecan^5 _to drive forth, carry away_: _expel, banish_.

forwrêgan _to accuse, calumniate_, _Chr_. ['_forwray_']

forwrêon^1 _to cover over_, LkR 23^45.

forwrîtan^1 _to cut in two_, B 2705.

forwrîðan^1 _to bind up_, #Lcd# 122a.

forwundian _to wound_, _Chr_. ['_forwound_']

forwundorlic _very wonderful_, GD. adv. -lîce.

forwurðan = forweorðan

forwyrcan (e) _to do wrong, sin_, Æ, CP. forworht mann _criminal_, CP:
_ruin, undo, destroy_, _Cr_; Æ, AO, CP: _condemn, convict, curse_:
_forfeit_: _barricade, obstruct, close up_.

forwyrd fn. _destruction, ruin, fall, death_, Æ, CP. [forweorðan]

forwyrdan _to perish_, #Andr#.

forwyrdendlic _perishable_.

forwyrht n. _misdeed_, MF 160.

forwyrhta m. _agent, deputy_: _evil-doer, malefactor, ruined person_.
[fore-]

forwyrnan (Æ) = forwiernan

forwyrnednes f. _restraint, self-denial, continence_, BH 160^10.

forwyrpnes f. _casting out_, _LPs_ 21^7.

foryld = foreald

foryldan = forieldan

foryrman _to reduce to poverty, bring low_, BH, W. [earm]

fossere m. _spade_. [_L._ fossorium]

fôster == fôstor

fôstor n. _sustenance, maintenance, food, nourishment_, _Lcd_; Æ.
['_foster_']

fôstorbearn n. _foster-child_.

fôstorbrôðor m. '_foster-brother_,' WW.

fôstorcild (e^2) n. _foster-child_, ÆL.

fôstorfæder m. '_foster-father_,' MH.

fôstorland n. _land granted for the support of the recipients_, _Ct_.
['_fosterland_']

fôstorlêan n. _payment for maintenance_, LL 442[2]; #Men# 152.

fôstorling m. _foster-child, nursling_, _WW_. ['_fosterling_']

fôstormann m. _bondsman, security_.

fôstormôdor f. '_foster-mother_,' _MH_.

fôstornôð m. _pasture, sustenance_, #EPs# 22^2.

fôstorsweostor f. _foster-sister_.

fôstrað (e^2) m. _food_: _manna_.

fôstrian _to 'foster,' nourish_, _Sc_ (ê).

fôstring m. _disciple_, NG.

fôstur = fôstor

fôt m. ds. fêt, fôte, nap. fêt, fôtas _foot (as limb and as measure)_,
_B, LL, NG_; Æ, AO, CP.

fôtâdl fn. _gout in the feet_.

fôtâdlig _having gout in the feet_.

fôtbred n. _foot-board, stirrup_, WW 107^6.

fôtclâð m. '_commissura_'? MtL 9^16.

±fôtcopsian, ±fôtcypsan _to fetter_, #Pss#.

fôt-cosp, -cops m. _foot-fetter_, Æ.

fôtcoðu f. _gout in the feet_, OEG.

fôtece m. _gout in the feet_, #Lcd#.

fôter n. _darnel, tares_, MtL 13^27.

fôtfeter f. _fetter for the feet_, WW 116^8.

fôtgangende _going on foot_, OEG 5254.

fôtgemearc n. _foot-measurement, space of a foot_, B 3043.

fôtgemet n. _foot-fetter_, #EPs# 104^18.

fôtgew¯æde fn? _covering for the feet_, RB 88^14.

+fôtian _to hasten up_, MkL 15^44.

fôt-lâst (Æ), -l¯æst mf. _footprint, spoor_.

fôtlic _on foot, pedestrian_.

fôtm¯æl n. _foot-measure_.

fôtm¯ælum adv. _step by step, by degrees_, CM 883.

fôtrâp m. _the loose part of the sheet by which a sail is trimmed to the
wind, 'propes,'_ WW 167^11.

fôtsceamol (e^2, e^3, u^3) m. _footstool_, Æ.

fôtsceanea m. _foreleg_, _Lcd_ 1·362. [v. '_shank_']

fôtsetl n. _footstool_, #Chr# 1053#c#.

fôtsîd _reaching to the feet_, NC 289.

fôtspor n. _footprints, spoor_, #Lcd#.

fôtspure n. _foot-rest, foot-support_, #Chr# 1070#e#.

fôtstân m. _base, pedestal_, Æ.

fôtstapol m. _footstep_, #LPs# 17^37.

fôtswæð n. (nap. -swaðu), fôtswaðu f. _footprint, footstep_: _foot_, Æ.

fôtswile (y) m. _swelling of the foot_, #Lcd#.

fôtðwêal n. _washing of the feet_, W, WW.

fôtwærc n. _pain in the foot, gout_, #Lcd#.

fôt-welm, -wylm, -wolma m. _sole of the foot_, Æ.

fôð ind. pres. pl. of fôn.

fôð-or (-er, -ur) n. _load, cartload_, _Chr_: _food, fodder_: _covering,
case, basket_. ['_fother_']

fôðorn m. _lancet_, #Lcd# 19b.

fôwer = fêower

fox m. '_fox_,' _Lk, VPs_.

foxesclâte f. _burdock_, #Lcd# 54a.

foxesclîfe f. _foxglove_? _greater burdock_? WW 135#n#1.

foxesfôt m. _fox-foot, xiphion_, #Lcd#.

foxesglôfe f. _foxglove_, WW 296^25.

foxhyll m. _fox-hill_.

foxung f. _foxlike wile, craftiness_, ÆL 16^162.

fra = fram

fraced, fraceð, fracod == fracoð

fracoð I. adj. _vile, bad, wicked, criminal, impious, filthy,
abominable_, _BH_: _useless, worthless_. ['_fraced_'] II. n. _insult,
contumely, disgrace_: _wickedness_.

fracoðd¯æd (-od) f. _misdeed_, W 188^15.

fracoðe adv. _contemptuously, shamefully_.

fracoðlic _base, ignominious, shameful, lewd_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce, CP.

fracoð-licnes, -nes (Æ) f. _vileness, coarseness, obscenity_.

fracoðscipe (-od) _scandalous conduct_, RB 141^6.

fracoðword n. _insulting word_, GD 152^7.

fracud, fracuð == fracoð

fr¯æ- = frêa-

fræc == frec

fr¯æc- = frêc- (v. ES 39·327 ff. as to these four forms).

  [[Printed on one line:
  fræc == frec; fr¯æc- = frêc-]]

fræcful _greedy_, OEG 2445.

fræcmâse (e) f. _titmouse_, WW.

fr¯æcûð (#Gl#) = fracoð

fræfel n? _cunning_, #Gl#.

fræfele _bold, insolent, cunning_. [_Ger._ frevel]

fræfelian _to be cunning_, #Gl#.

fræfellîce _shamelessly_, AO (e): _astutely_.

fræfelnes f. _sharpness, shrewdness_, OEG.

+fr¯æge (ê) I. ¶ n. _hearsay, report, knowledge_. mine +f. _as I have
heard say_. II. adj. _well-known, celebrated, reputable_, CP:
_notorious, disreputable_. [fricgan]

frægn I. pret. 3 sg. of frignan. II. fregen II.

frægning f. _questioning_.

fræm- = frem-

fr¯æmicel _pre-eminent_, WW 530^13.

fræng = frægn

±fræpgian (NG) _to accuse_: _reverence_.

fr¯æt I. ¶ _perverse, proud, obstinate_. II. pret. 3 sg. of fretan.

frætegung (Æ) = frætwung

frætew-, frætew- = frætw-

frætgenga m. _apostasy_, #Gl#.

fr¯ætig _perverse, proud_, #Jul# 284.

frætlæppa m. _dew-lap_, WW 179^3.

fr¯æton pres. pl. of fretan.

frætwa, frætwe fp. _treasures, ornaments, trappings, armour_: m.
_adorner_, #Cr# 556. [+tâwe]

frætwædnes = frætwednes

±frætwan, fræt(te)wian _to ornament, adorn_, AO: _clothe, cover over_,
CP 83^10.

fræt-wednes, -wodnes f. _adorning, decoration, ornament_.

frætwian v. frætwan.

frætwung f. _adorning, decoration, ornament_, Æ.

fragendlic = framigendlic

+frâgian _to learn by inquiry_, MtL 2^16.

fram (o) I. prep. w. d. (instr.) (local) _'from,' by_, _Æ, Bl, Chr_:
(temporal) _since_, _A, Ma_: (agent) _by_, _Bl_: _as a result of_, _Mt_:
(with verbs of saying and hearing) _of, about, concerning_. f. gân _to
depart_. comps. v. fram-, from-. II. adv. _from, forth, out, away_. III.
adj. (eo) _strenuous, active, bold, strong_. [_Ger._ fromm]

framâcyrran = framcyrran (in this and the following words fram- may
often be taken as a separate preposition).

framâdôn anv. _to take from, do away, cut off, cut out_.

framâdrýfan^1 _to drive away, expel_.

framâhyldan _to turn from_, #Lcd#.

framânýdan _to drive away_.

framâscæcan^6 _to shake off_.

framâstyrian _to remove_, #RPs# 65^20.

framâtêon^2 _to draw away from_.

framâteran^4 '_diripere_,' #ÆGr# 168^10.

framâwendan _to turn from or away_.

framâweorpan^3 _to cast away_, #ÆGr#.

frambîge m. _apostasy_, W 49^12.

frambringan^3 _to take away_, #Lcd#.

framceorfan^3 _to cut off_.

framcyme (o) m. _issue, posterity_, #Gen# 1765.

framcynn (o) n. _issue, posterity_: _origin_.

framcyrran (e) _to turn from, avert_: _take from_.

framdôn anv. _to put off, stop, interrupt_, #Sc# 131^8.

framfæreld m? n? _departure_, Æ.

framfaru (o) f. _excess_, DR 17^8.

framfundung f. _departure_.

framgewîtan^1 _to apostatize_, #Sc# 83^2.

framian _to avail, benefit_, RB.

framierning (o^1, e^2) f. _outflowing_, DR 8^1.

framigendlic _effective_.

framlâd f. _departure_, #Gen# 2098 (o).

framlêce _turned from_, GPH 401.

framlic _strong_. adv. -lîce _boldly, strongly, strenuously, quickly_.

framlôcian (o^1) _to look back_, CP 403^6.

framnes (o^1) f. _vigour_, #Nar# 7^22.

framscîpe I. m. _exercise, action_. II. m. _fraternity_.

framsetnung f. _foundation_, JnR 17^24.

framsîð (o) m. _departure_.

framslitnes f. _desolation_, NG (o).

framswengan _to swing away, shake off_, WW 524^30.

framung = fremung

framweard (o) _about to depart, doomed to die_, _Bo, Seaf_; CP:
_enterprising_? ['_fromward_']

framweardes (o) adv. _away from_, _Lcd_. ['_fromwards_']

frân pret. 3 sg. of frînan.  [[under "frignan"]]

franca m. _lance, javelin_, Æ.

±frâsian _to ask, inquire, find out by inquiry_: _tempt, try_.

frâsung f. _questioning, temptation_.

fratwian = frætwian  [[under "frætwan"]]

frêa ¶ I. m. gs. frêan _ruler, lord, king, master_: _the Lord, Christ,
God_: _husband_. [_Goth._ frauja] II. (#VPs#) = frêo I.

frêa- intensitive prefix (= _L._ per-).

frêabeorht _glorious_.

frêabeorhtian (¯æ) _to proclaim_, #CPs# 41^9.

frêabodian _to proclaim, declare_, #LPs# 118^172.

frêadrêman _to exult_, #LPs#.

frêadrihten ¶ m. _lord, master_.

frêafætt (¯æ^1) _very fat_, WW 532^24.

frêaglêaw _very wise_, #Dan# 88.

frêahræd (¯æ^1, -hræð) _very quick_, #Gl#.

frêam¯ære ¶ _very celebrated_.

frêamicel (¯æ^1) _pre-eminent_, WW 530^13.

frêamiht _great strength_, #RPs# 42^2.

freamsum = fremsum

frêan = frêon

  [[Cross-reference uncertain: variant of "frêogan" or form of "frêo"?]]

frêaofestlice (¯æ^1) _very quickly_, WW 530^13.

frêareccere m. _prince_, #LRPs# 118^161.

frêas pret. 3 sg. of frêosan.

frêasian = frâsian

frêatorht _very bright, radiant_.

frêaðancian _to exult_, #RPs# 52^7.

frêawine ¶ m. _lord and friend_.

frêawlitig _very beautiful_, NC 290.

frêawrâsn f. _splendid chain_, B 1451.

frêbran = frêfran

frec (æ, i) _greedy_, _MtL_ (i); Æ: _eager, bold, daring_, _Met_:
_dangerous_ (v. ES 39·327 ff.). ['_freck_']

freca ¶ m. _warrior, hero_.

frêced- = frêcen-

frêcelnes = frêcennes

frêcelsod _exposed to danger_, WW 465^25.

frêcen n. gs. frêcnes _danger, peril_.

frêcendlic, frêcenlic (CP) _dangerous, mischievous, perilous, terrible_.
adv. -lîce, AO.

frêcennes f. _harm, danger_, CP.

freceo '_lucor_'? '_lurcor_'? Cp 1240 (v. ES 39·336; 42·168).

frecful (æ) _greedy_, OEG 2445.

freclîce _greedily_, GD 31^1.

frecmâse = fræcmâse

frêcn- = frêcen-

frêcne (¯æ) I. _dangerous, perilous_, CP: _terrible_: _savage, wicked_:
_daring, bold_. [v. ES 39·328f.] II. adv. _dangerously_: _fiercely,
severely_: _boldly, audaciously_.

frecnes f. _greediness_.

frêcnes = frêcennes

+frecnian _to make bold_, #Da# 184: _endanger, imperil_, ÆL 30·436.

frecwâsend m. _gluttony_, A 6·100.

+frêdan _to feel, perceive_, _Æ, Bo_; CP. ['_frede_'; frôd]

+frêdendlic _perceptible_, #ÆGr# 4^6.

+frêdm¯ælum _little by little_, OEG 3245.

+frêdnes f. _feeling, perception_, #Bo#.

+frêdra _more acute_, CP 123^19.

frefelîce = fræfellîce

frêfernes f. _consolation_.

±frêfran _to cheer, comfort, console_, _BH_; CP. ['_frover_']

frêfrend (ie^2) mf. _comforter, consoler_: _the Comforter (Holy Ghost)_,
#Bl#.

frêfrian (_Jn_; Æ) = frêfran

frêfriend = frêfrend

frêfrung f. _consolation_, #Gen# 37^35.

+frêge = +fr¯æge

fregen, fregn I. = frægn pret. 3 sg. of frignan. II. n. _question_, #An#
255.

fregnan = frignan

fregnðearle _enquiringly_, ÆL 23^566.

fregnung f. _questioning_, MkL p4^19.

freht n? '_auspicium_,' DR 97^7.

frem = fram adj.

fremde _foreign, alien, strange_, _LL_; AO, CP: _unfriendly_, _Sol_
(-ede): _estranged from, devoid of, remote from_. ['_fremd_']

±fremdian _to estrange_, RB: _curse_, MkLR (v. A 16·127).

freme I. ¶ _vigorous, flourishing_, _B, Gen_. ['_frim_'; fram] II. =
fremu

fremede = fremde

fremedl¯æcan _to alienate_, #RPs# 57^4.

±fremednes f. _accomplishment, fulfilment, effect_, Æ.

fremful _useful, profitable, beneficial_, _Lcd_. ['_fremeful_'] adv.
-lîce _efficaciously_.

fremfulnes f. _utility, profit_, RB 83^18.

±fremian, fremman _to further, advance, support_, _An, B_: _frame, make,
do, perpetrate, commit, afford_, _B, Gen_; CP: (w. d.) _avail, benefit,
do good_, _Æ, Mt_. ['_freme_']

fremlic (eo, o) _profitable_, BH 30^28.

±fremming f. _purpose, effect, performance, progress_, Æ.

fremnes = fremednes

fremsum _beneficent, benign, kind, gracious_, Æ, CP.

fremsumlic _benignant, kind_, GD 280. adv. -lîce, CP.

fremsumnes f. _benefit, benignity, kindness, liberality_.

fremð- (NG) = fremd-

+fremðian _to curse_, MkL 14^71.

fremðlic = frymðlic

fremu f. _advantage, gain, benefit_, _Bo, Ep, Lcd_; CP. ['_freme_']

fremung (eo, o) f. _advantage, profit, good_.

Frencisc '_French_,' _Chr_.

frênd == frêond

frendian _to anathematize_, WW 484^31. [cp. +fremðian]

freng = frægn pret. 3 sg. of frignan.

frêo I. nap. often frîge '_free_,' _Bo, Ex, JnR_; CP, Æ: (¶) _glad,
joyful_: (¶) _noble, illustrious_, _Gen_. [frêo- v. also frîg-] II. ¶ f.
_woman, lady_. III. m. = frêa. IV. imperat. of frêogan. V. f? _freedom,
immunity_.

frêobearn n. _free-born child, child of gentle birth_.

frêoborh = friðborh

frêobrôðor m. _own brother_, #Ex# 338.

frêoburh f. _city_, B 694.

frêod I. ¶ f. _peace, friendship_: _goodwill, affection_. II. pp. of
frêogan. III. = frêot

frêode pret. 3 sg. of frêogan.

frêodohtor f. _freeborn daughter_, W 193^6.

frêodôm m. _'freedom,' state of free-will, charter, emancipation,
deliverance_, _Bo_; AO, CP.

frêodryhten ¶ = frêadrihten

frêodscipe (ES 39·340) = frêondscipe?

±frêogan _to 'free,' liberate, manumit_, _Æ, Chr_; AO: _love, embrace,
think of lovingly, honour_.

frêoge = +fr¯æge

frêoh = frêo

frêolâc n. _freewill offering, oblation_, #LPs# 50^21.

frêol¯æta m. _freedman_, WW.

±frêolic _free, freeborn_: _glorious, stately, magnificent, noble_, _B_:
_beautiful, charming_. [_'freely_'] adv. -lîce '_freely,' readily_, _Bo,
VPs_.

frêols I. mn. _freedom, immunity, privilege_: _feast-day, festival_.
[origl. frîheals] II. = frêo I.

frêols¯æfen m. _eve of a feast_, LL 383[56].

frêolsbôc f. _charter of freedom_, Ct.

frêolsbryce (i) m. _breach of festival_.

frêolsdæg m. _feast-day, festival-day_, Æ.

frêolsdôm = frêodôm

frêols-end, -iend m. _liberator_, #EPs#.

frêolsgefa m. _emancipator_, LL 13[8].

frêolsgêr n. _year of jubilee_, WW 420^31.

frêolsian (±) _to deliver, liberate_, #Bl, EPs#: _to keep a feast or
holy day, celebrate_, _Æ_. ['_frels_']

frêolslic _festive, festival_, CM 350. adv. _freely_: _solemnly_.

frêolsmann m. _freedman_, KC 3·295^6.

frêolsniht f. _eve of a festival_, NC 290.

frêolsstôw f. _festival-place_, LL 338[38].

frêolstîd f. _festival, feast-day_, Æ.

frêolsung f. _celebration of a feast_.

freom = fram III.

freom- = fram-, frem-

frêom¯æg ¶ m. _free-kinsman_.

frêomann m. _'free-man,' freeborn man_, _Gen, LL_.

frêonama m. _surname_, BH.

frêond m. ds. frîend, nap. frîend, frêond, frêondas _'friend,'
relative_, _B, El, Gen_; AO, CP: _lover_.

frêondheald _amiable_, #Lcd# 3·192^15.

frêondhealdlic _related, akin_, WW 217^29.

frêondlâr f. _friendly counsel_, B 2377.

frêondlaðu f. _friendly invitation_, B 1192.

frêondlêas '_friendless_,' _JnL_. f. mann _outlaw_, _LL_.

frêondlêast f. _want of friends_, _LL_ 336[35].

frêondlic _friendly, well-disposed, kindly_, BH, W. adv. -lîce, CP.

frêondlîðe _kind to one's friends_, ES 39·340.

frêondlufu f. _friendship, love_, #Gen# 1834.

frêondmyne f. _amorous intention_, #Gen# 1831.

frêondr¯æden f. _friendship_, Æ: _conjugal love_.

frêondscipe m. '_friendship_,' _B, Lcd_; AO, CP: _conjugal love_.

frêondspêd f. _abundance of friends_.

frêondspêdig _rich in friends_.

frêone asm. of frêo adj.

frêonoma = frêonama

frêorig ¶ _freezing, frozen, cold, chilly_: _blanched with fear, sad,
mournful_. [frêosan]

frêorig-ferð, -môd ¶ _sad_, #Gu#.

frêoriht n. _rights of freemen_, LL, W.

±frêosan^2 _to 'freeze,'_ _Æ, Bl_.

frêosceat m. _freedman_, RB 138^21.

frêot m. _freedom_, LL. frêotes ðolian _to be reduced to slavery_.

frêotgifa m. _liberator_, WW.

frêot-gifu, -gift f. _emancipation_, WW.

frêotmann m. _freedman_, #Bk#, TC, W.

freoð- = frið-

-frêoðan^2 v. â-f.

freoðo- = friðo-

freoðu- = friðu-

frêowîf (i^1) n. _free-woman_, LL 7[73].

frêowine = frêawine

Fresan = Frisan

Fresisc (y) _in the Frisian manner, Frisian_, #Chr#. [Frisan]

±fretan^5 _to devour, eat, consume_, CP: _break_, #Ex# 147. [for, etan]

fretgenga = frætgenga

frettan _to feed upon, consume_. [fretan]

frettol _greedy, gluttonous_, WW 171^34.

fretw- = frætw-

freðo = friðu

freðo- = friðo-, friðu

frî = frêo I.

frîa = frêa

frîand (A) = frêond

frîborh (v. LL 2·81) = friðborh

fric (NG) = frec

fricca, friccea m. _herald, crier_, CP (? v. ES 39·336).

fricgan^5 ¶ _to ask, inquire into, investigate_: (+) _learn, find out by
inquiry_. [frignan; cp. _Ger._ fragen]

frîcian _to dance_, _Mt_. ['_frike_']

friclan ¶ w. g. _to seek, desire_.

friclo f. _appetite_, #Lcd# 73a.

frico f. '_usura_,' MtL 25^27 (v. ES 39·328f.).

fricolo adv. _eagerly, fervently_.

frictrung (OET 26) = frihtrung

frîdhengest = frîðhengest?  [[headword spelled "friðhengest"]]

frîenan = frînan = frignan

frîend v. frêond.

+frîend pl. _friends_, _Lk_ (ý). ['_i-freond_']

frîg == frêo

frîgan = frêogan

frîgdæg = frîgedæg

frîge I. ¶ fp. _love_. II. v. frêo.

frîgea m. _lord, master_, LL (= frêa).

frîge¯æfen m. _Thursday evening_, Æ.

frîgedæg m. '_Friday_,' _LL, Ma_; Æ.

+frîgend m. _liberator_, #VPs#.

frigenes = frignes

frîgeniht f. _Thursday night_, W 305^24.

frigest, frigeð pres. 2, 3 sg. of fricgan.

+frîgian _to embrace_, MkL 10^16.

±frignan^3, frînan _ask, inquire_, _B, BH, Cp, Ps_; AO, CP. ['_frayne_']

±frignes f. _interrogation, question_.

frignung f. _question_, GD 137^29.

frigst, frihst pres. 2 sg. of fricgan.

frihtere m. _diviner, soothsayer_. [freht]

frihtrian _to divine_.

frihtrung f. _soothsaying, divination_, WW.

frimdig = frymdig

frînan = frignan

frînd = frîend

frîo == frêo

frîs (ý) _crisped, curled_, #GnE# 96.

Frisan (e) mp. _Frisians_, AO.

frisca = frysca

fristmearc (#Gl#) = firstmearc

frit, friteð, fritt pres. 3 sg. of fretan.

frið (y) mn. _peace, tranquillity, security, refuge_, _AO_; CP, Æ.
f. niman _to make peace_: _privilege of special protection, and penalty
for the breach of it_, LL 10[5]: _restoration of rights (to an outlaw)_,
LL 316[13]. ['_frith_']

frîð _stately, beautiful_, #Rd# 10^9.

friða (eo) m. _protector_, #PPs# 70^3.

frîðâð m. _oath of peace_, #Chr# 1012#e#.

friðbêna m. _suppliant, refugee_, LL.

friðborh m. _surety for peace_, LL.

friðbræc f. _breach of the peace_, LL.

friðburg f. _town with which there is peace, city of refuge_, LL
222[2,1].

friðcandel ¶ f. _the sun_.

friðelêas = friðlêas

friðgeard m. _enclosed space_, LL: _court of peace (heaven)_, #Cr#.

friðgedâl n. _death_, #Gen# 1142. [ferhð?]

friðgegilda m. _member of a peace-guild_, LL 173 Pro.

friðgeorn _peaceable_, MtL 5^9.

friðgewrit n. _peace agreement_, LL 144.

friðgild n. _peace guild_, LL 181.

friðgîsl m. _peace-hostage_, LL 378[9,1].

friðhengest (frid-) m. _horse of peace_? #Rd# 23^4.

friðhûs n. _sanctuary_, WW 186^23.

friðian (eo) _to give_ 'frið' _to, make peace with, be at peace with_:
(±) _cherish, protect, guard, defend, keep_, _AO, Chr_; CP: _observe_.
['_frith_']

friðiend m. _helper, defender_, #PPs#, W 239^7.

friðland n. _friendly territory_, #Chr#.

friðlêas _peaceless, outlawed_, LL 318.

friðlic _mild, lenient_, LL.

friðmâl n. _article of peace_, LL 220 Pro. [m¯æl]

friðmann m. _man under special peace-protection_, LL 222.

friðo == freoðu, frið  [[redirected to "friðu"]]

friðobêacen (eo^1) n. _sign of peace_, #Gen# 1045.

friðoscealc (eo) ¶ m. _angel_.

friðosibb f. _peace-bringer_, B 2017.

friðospêd (eo) ¶ f. _abundant peace_.

friðotâcn n. _sign of peace_, #Gen# 2369.

friðoðêawas ¶ (eo^1) mp. _place_.

friðow¯ær (eo^1) ¶ f. _treaty of peace_.

friðowang (eo^1) m. _peaceful plain_, B 2959.

friðowaru (eo) ¶ f. _protection_.

friðo-webba (eo^1) § m., -webbe ¶ f. _peace-maker_.

friðscipe m. _ship for defence_, LL 441 (? read fyrdscipe).

friðsôcn f. _sanctuary, asylum_, LL.

friðsplott m. _peace-spot_, LL (248^5).

friðstôl m. _sanctuary, asylum, refuge_, _LL, Ps_. ['_frithstool_']

friðstôw f. _refuge, sanctuary_.

friðsum _pacific, peaceful_: (+) _safe, fortified_.

friðsumian _to make peaceful, protect_? NC 290.

friðu (eo) fm. _peace, safety, protection_, _AO, Mt_: _refuge, asylum_.
['_frith_']

friðu- = friðo-

frocga = frogga

frôd ¶ _wise_: _old_.

frôdian _to be wise_, #Rim# 32.

frôfer == frôfor

frôferian = frêfran

frôfor fmn. (e^2, u^2) gs. frôfre _consolation, joy, refuge_, _Æ_; CP:
_compensation, help, benefit_. ['_frover_']

frôforbôc (e^2) f. _book of consolation_, #Bo# 50^6.

frôforgâst (frôfre-) m. _consoling spirit, Holy Ghost, Comforter_, _Jn_;
Æ. [v. '_frover_']

frôforlic (e^2) _kind, helpful_, W. adv. -lîce, W 295^3.

frôfornes f. _consolation_, LkL 6^24 (oe).

frôforword n. _word of consolation_, GD 344^28.

frôfrian = frêfran

frogga m. '_frog_,' _Æ, WW_.

froht (NG) = forht

from == fram

from- also = frem-, frum-

froren pp. of frêosan.

frosc = forsc

frost = forst

frôwe f. _woman_, DD 291. [_Ger._ frau]

frox = forsc

frugnen pp., frugnon pret. pl. of frignan.

frum I. _primal, original, first_. II. = fram

fruma m. _beginning, origin, cause_, AO, CP: _creation_, #Chr# 33:
_originator, inventor, founder, creator_: _first-born_, #CPs# 135^10:
(¶) _prince, king, chief, ruler_. on fruman _at first_. wæstma fruman
_firstfruits_. [fram]

frumâcennes f. _nativity_, JnL p5^19.

frumbearn n. _first-born child_.

frumbyrd f. _birth_, TC 369^9.

frumbyrdling n. _youth_, _WW_ 171^23. ['_frumberdling_']

frumcenned _first-begotten, firstborn_, Æ, AO: _original, primitive_,
#ÆGr#.

frumcnêow n. _primal generation_, #Ex# 371.

frumcyn ¶ n. _ancestry, origin, descent, lineage_: _race, tribe_.

frumcynnend = frumcenned

frumcyrr m. _first time_, LL 164[25,2].

frumdysig n. _first offence_, NC 290.

frum-gâr ¶, -gâra ¶ m. _leader, patriarch, chieftain, noble_. [cp. _L._
primi-pilus]

frumgesceap n. _creation of the world_, #Cr# 840.

frumgeweorc n. _original construction_, A 11·174^6.

frumgewrit n. _deed, document_, W 252^12.

frumgifu f. _prerogative, privilege_, #Gl#.

frumgrîpa m. _firstling_, W 113^6.

frumgyld n. _first instalment_, LL 190.

frumhêowung (î) f. _original formation_, WW 467^27.

frumhrægl n. _first garment_ (sc. _of fig-leaves_), #Gen# 943.

frumildo f. _primeval time_, WW 341^22. [ieldo]

frumlêoht n. _dawn_, AF 4·56.

frumlic _original, primitive_. adv. -lîce.

frumlîda m. _chief sailor_, v. OEG 32.

frumlýhtan _to dawn_, #Bl# 207^35.

frummynetslege m. _first coinage_, ÆL 23^479.

frumr¯æd m. _primary ordinance_, LL 246.

frumr¯æden f. _space of time_, #An# 147.

frumrinc (o^1) _chieftain_, RHy 4^15.

frumrîpa m. _firstfruits_, LL 40[38].

frumsceaft f. _first creation, origin, primeval condition_, _B_:
_creature_: _home_. ['_frumschaft_']

frumsceapen _first created, first_, Æ.

frumsceatt m. _firstfruits_, #ELPs#.

frumscepend m. _creator_, DR 16^10.

frumscyld ¶ f. _original sin_.

frumsetnes f. _authority_, DR 123^8.

frumsetnung f. _foundation, creation_, JnR 17^24.

frumsl¯æp m. _first sleep_, AO.

frumspellung f. _recapitulation_, OEG 1153; 2^31.

frumspr¯æc f. _first saying_: _promise_.

frumstaðol m. _first state_, #Rd# 61^3.

frumstemn m. _prow_, WW 288^21.

frumstôl m. _first or principal seat, paternal home_, LL.

frumtalu f. _first statement_ (_of a witness_?) LL 385.

frumtîd f. _beginning_, GD 212^5.

frumtýhtle f. _first accusation, first charge_, LL 336 (35). [têon II.]

frumð = frymð

frumwæstm mf. _firstfruits_.

frumweorc n. _primeval work, creation_, #An# 805.

frumwîfung f. _first marriage_, W 304^27.

frumwylm m. _new-born zeal_, RB 135^5.

frumwyrhta m. _creator_, DR 37^4.

frunen pp., frun(n)on pret. pl. of frînan.  [[under "frignan"]]

frungon = frugnon pret. pl. of frignan.

fruron pret. pl. of frêosan.

frý == frêo

fryccea = fricca

fryht- (N) = forht-, fyrht-

frylsian (#Bo#) = freolsian  [[headword spelled "frêolsian"]]

frym- = frum-, fyrm-

frymdig (i) _curious, inquisitive_, Æ: _desirous_. f. bêon _to entreat_.

frymetling f. _young cow_, LL 451[13].

frymð I. mf. _origin, beginning, foundation_, _Bo_; Æ, AO: (in pl.)
_creation_, _El_: _creature_. ['_frumth_'] II. = fyrmð

frymð-lic, -elic _primeval, primitive, first_. adv. -lîce, OEG 5211.

frymðu, frymðo (_MtL_) = frymð

frymðyldo '_primævus_'? v. OEG 2381.

frýnd (Æ) nap. of frêond.

frýs = frîs

Frysan = Frisan

frysca I. (i) m. _kite, bittern_, #Gl#. II. '_pusio_'? #Gl# (v. A
19·495).

frýsð pres. 3 sg. of frêosan.

fryt pres. 3 sg. of fretan.

fryð == frið

fryð- also = freoð-, fyrð-

fugel == fugol

fugelbona m. _fowler_, #Cra# 80.

fugeldoppe f? _water-fowl_, WW 131^20.

fugelere (AO) = fuglere

fugeleswýse f. _larkspur_, WW 298^24.

fugelhwata m. _augur_, WW 140^5.

fugellîm m. _bird-lime_, OEG 3105.

fugelnett n. _bird net_, WW 277^16.

fugelnoð, fugeloð = fugoloð

fugeltimber n. _young bird_, #Ph# 236.

fugeltrêo n. _perch (of a bird)_.

fugelweohlere m. _augur_, WW 108^12. [wiglere]

fuglere m. '_fowler_,' _AO_.

fuglesbêan f. _vetch_, #Gl#.

fuglian _to catch birds_, _ÆGr_. ['_fowl_']

fuglung f. _bird-catching_, WW.

fugol m. gs. fugles _'fowl,' bird_, _B, Mt_; CP; Mdf.

fugol-, see also fugel-.

fugolcynn n. _bird-tribe_, _Æ_. ['_fowlkin_']

fugoldæg (u^2) m. _feast-day_, TC 460^20.

fugolh¯ælsere m. _augur_.

fugoloð m. _bird-catching, fowling_, Æ.

fugolwylle _swarming with birds_, BH 30^10. [weallan]

fugul- = fugel-, fugol-

fuhl- = fugl-

fûht _damp, moist_. [_Ger._ feucht]

fûhtian _to be moist_, NC 290.

fuhton pret. pl. of feohtan.

ful I. n. _beaker, cup_, Æ. II. == full

fûl I. _'foul,' unclean, impure, vile, corrupt, rotten_, _Æ, Bl, Cp, Cr,
WW_; CP. f. bêam _black alder_, #Lcd# 29b: _guilty_, LL. II. n. _filth,
foulness, impurity, crime, offence_, _El, OET_. ['_foul_']

fulbeorht _very bright, resplendent_, CP 87^23.

fulbrecan^4 _to violate_, LL 280[2,2].

fuldôn anv. _to satisfy_, RB 70^21.

fûle adv. _foully_.

fulêode pret. 3 sg. of fullgân.

fûletrêo n. _black alder_, Cp 430#a#.

fulfæstnian _to ratify fully_, #Chr# 675#e#.

fulfaran^6 _to travel_, LL 383[56].

fulfealdan^7 '_explicare_,' #ÆGr# 138^9.

fulgeare _quite well_, ÆL 3^456. [gearwe]

fulgôd _very good_, ÆL 6^124.

fulgon pret. pl. of fêolan.

fulhâr _completely grey, very hoary_, WW 380^13.

fulhealden _contented_, WW 211^30.

fulht- = fulwiht-

fûlian _to be or become foul, decay, rot_, _AO, Ps_.

full I. adj. (w. g.) _'full' filled, complete, perfect, entire, utter_,
_Gen, Ps, Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP: _swelling, plump_, #Lcd#. be fullan _fully,
perfectly, completely_. II. adv. _very, fully, entirely, completely,
thoroughly_, _Bo, Ps_. f. nêah _almost, very nearly_. III. = ful

full- v. also ful-.

fulla m. _assembly_? Ct.

full¯æst (â, ê; fylst) m. _help, support_, _Ex_. ['_filst_']

±full¯æstan (ê) w. d. _to help, support_, _AO_; Lk. ['_filst_']

+fullan = +fyllan

fullberstan^3 _to burst completely_, W 267^18.

fullbêtan _to make full amends_.

fullblîðe _very glad_.

fullboren _completely born_, CP 367^18: _of noble birth_.

fullbryce m. _complete breach of the peace_, LL.

fullcl¯æne _very pure_, AS 29^12.

fullcræftig _very efficient, virtuous_.

fullcûð _notorious, famous_.

-fulle v. sin-f.

fullendian _to complete_, _BH_. ['_fullend_']

fullere m. _'fuller,' bleacher_, _Mk_.

fullest == full¯æst

fullflêon^2 _to take to flight, escape completely_.

fullforðian _to fulfil_, NC 291.

fullfremed _perfect_, CP. adv. -lîce _fully, perfectly, completely_,
_Bl_.

fullfremednes f. _perfection_, _BH_; CP. ['_fullfremedness_']

±full-fremman, -fremian _to fulfil, perfect, practise, do fully,
complete_, _Bo_; CP. ['_fullfreme_']

fullfyligan _to follow, obey_, W 95^19: '_persequi_,' #EPs# 7^6.

fullfyllan '_complere_,' _ÆGr_ 153^1. ['_fulfil_']

full-gân pret. 3 sg. -êode anv., -gangan^7 _to accomplish, fulfil,
perform, carry out_, Æ: _follow, imitate, obey_: _help_, AO.

fullgearwian _to finish, complete_, GD 126^2.

fullgedrifen (w. g.) _driven full of_.

fullgeorne _very eagerly_, CP 255^22.

fullgewêpned _fully armed_, #Chr#.

fullgrôwan^7 _to grow to perfection, flourish_, CP 67^23.

fullhâl _thoroughly well_, GD 248^1.

fullian I. _to fulfil, complete, perfect_. II. (_Jn_) = fulwian

fullic _full_, #Chr# 785#c#?: '_catholicus_,' CHy 15. adv. -lîce
_entirety, fully, perfectly, completely_, _A, BH_; Æ.

fûllic _foul, unclean, objectionable, shameful, base_, #Lcd#, W. adv.
-lîce.

fulligan = fulwian

fullmannod _fully peopled_, #Bo# 40^17.

full-medeme _excellent, perfect_, GD. adv. -medomlîce, GD 331^13.

fullnes f. _fullness_.

fûllnes = fûlnes

fulloc _final or definite agreement_? LL 385.

fulloft adv. _very often_, CP.

fullðungen (ful-) _full-grown_, RB 133^1.

fullðungennes f. _full development_, MFH 160.

fulluht == fulwiht

fullunga adv. _fully_.

fullwêpnod _fully armed_, #Chr# 1070#e#.

fullwer m. _complete_ 'wer,' _full atonement_, #Rd# 24^14?

fullwyrcan _to complete, fulfil_.

fulmægen n. _great power_, W 186^14.

fulnêah I. adj. _very near_. II. adv. _very nearly, almost_, CP.

fûlnes f. _foulness, filthy smell_.

fûlon rare pret. pl. of fêolan.

fulraðe adv. _very quickly_, AO.

fulrîpod _mature_, RB 139^9.

fûlstincende _foul-stinking_.

fulsumnes f. _abundance_, #EPs# 48^7.

fultêam = fultum

fultem- (CP), fultom- = fultum-

fultrûwian _to confide in_, #Bo# 60^23.

fultum (êa) m. _help, support, protection_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _forces,
army_, AO. ['_fultum_']

+fultuma m. _helper_, #SPs# 18^16.

±fultum-an, -ian _to help, support, assist_, Æ, CP: (¶) _be propitious
to, overlook_.

±fultumend, fultumiend m. _helper, fellow-worker_.

fultumlêas _without help_, AO 56^21.

fulwa m. _fuller_, MH 26^26.

fulwearm _entirely warm_, CP 447^5.

fulwere m. _baptizer, baptist_.

fulwêrig _very tired_, MFH 160.

±fulwian _to baptize_, _BH, MH_; AO, CP. ['_full_']

fulwiht, fulluht (_Mt_) mfn. _baptism, Christianity_, _Mt_; AO, CP.
['_fullought_']

+fulwiht-an, -ian _to baptize_, #Chr#, NG.

fulwihtbæð n. _baptismal bath, font_, Æ (fulluht-).

fulwihtbêna m. '_competitor, amicus vel rogator baptismi_,' WW 207^16.

fulwihtere m. _baptizer_: _the Baptist_.

fulwihtfæder m. _baptismal father, godfather, baptizer_, #Bl# 205^17.

fulwihthâd m. _baptismal order or vow_, #Bl# 109^28.

fulwihtnama m. _baptismal name, Christian name_.

+fulwihtnian (fulhtn-) _to baptize_, NC 291.

fulwihtstôw f. _baptistry_, #Bl# 140^20.

fulwihttîd f. _time of baptism_, #Men# 11.

fulwihtðêaw m. _rite of baptism_, #Met# 1^33.

fulwihtðênung (-uht) f. _baptismal service_, W 38^9.

fulwihtwæter n. _laver of baptism_, NC 291.

fulwihtwere m. _baptist_, #Bl# 161^6.

fulwuht = fulwiht

funde wk. pret. 3 sg., funden pp. of findan.

-fundelnes, -fundennes v. on-f.

fundian (w. of, tô) _to tend to, wish for, strive after, go, set out, go
forward, hasten_, _Æ, B, Cr, Gu_; CP. ['_found_']

fundon pret. pl. of findan.

fundung f. _setting forth, departure_, #Chr# 1106.

fûra v. furh.

furh f. gs. fûre, ds. fyrh, furh, gp. fûra _'furrow,' trench_, _BC,
Bo_; Æ.

furhwudu m. _pine_, Cp 420#p#.

±fûrian _to furrow_, OEG.

furlang n. _length of furrow, furlong_. [furh, lang]

furðan, furðon = furðum

furðerlucor = furðorlîcor

furðor adv. (of place and time) _'further,' more distant, forwards,
later_, _Æ, Chr_: _more_: _superior_. f. dôn _to promote_, _A_.

furðorlîcor (e^2, u^3) cp. adv. _more perfectly_.

furðra cp. adj. _'further' greater, superior_, _Jn_.

furðum (-an, -on) adv. _even, exactly, quite, already, just as, at
first_, _Bl, Mt_; AO, CP: _further, previously_. syððan f. _just as soon
as_. ['_forthen_']

furðumlic _luxurious, indulging_, AO 50^30.

furður == furðor

furuh = furh

fûs _striving forward, eager for, ready for, inclined to, willing,
prompt_, _B_; Æ: _expectant, brave, noble_: _ready to depart, dying_.
['_fous_']

fûse = fûslîce

fûslêoð ¶ n. _death-song, dirge_.

fûslic _ready to start_: _excellent_. adv. -lîce _readily, gladly_.

fûsnes f. _quickness_, EHy 6^25.

fustra? '_focus_,' '_ignis_,' v. OEG 1428.

fýf- = fîf-

fyhfang = feohfang

fyht- = feoht-

fýhtan (î) _to moisten_, OEG. [fûht]

fyl = fiell

±fýlan _to befoul, defile, pollute_, Æ.

+fylce n. _band of men, troop, army, host_, CP. [folc]

±fylcian _to marshal troops_. [folc]

fyld m. '_volumen_,' '_ruga_,' OEG.

fyldstôl = fealdestôl

±fylgan w. d. or a. _to follow, pursue_, Æ, CP: _persecute_: _follow
out, observe, obey_.

fylgend m. _follower, observer_, BH 472^7.

fylgestre f. _female follower_, OEG 1228.

fylgian = fylgan

fylging f. I. _following_, DR. II. (æ) _harrowing, harrow_. [fealg]

fylian, fyligan = fylgan

fyligendlic _that can or ought to be imitated_, CM 803.

fylignes f. _following, practice_, BH 160^23.

fyll = (1) fyllu; (2) fiell  [[(1) under "fyllo"]]

±fyllan I. _to _'fill_,' fill up, replenish, satisfy_, _An, Gen, Ps_; Æ:
_complete, fulfil_, _Az_. [full] II. ± (æ, e; = ie) wv. _to cause to
fall, strike down_, '_fell,' cut down_, _Ps, Rd_. +fylled wdg. _bereft_:
_throw down, defeat, destroy, kill_, _BH, Cr, Ps_: _tumble_: _cause to
stumble_, MtR.

fyllað m. _filling, filling up_, #Gen# 1513.

+fyllednes (i) f. _fulness, completion, fulfilment_, Æ.

-fyllen (fylen) v. mônað-f.  [[under "mônaðfylen"]]

fyllend = fylgend

+fyllendlic _filling, expletive_, #ÆGr# 261^5.

fyllesêoc _epileptic_.

fyllesêocnes f. _epilepsy_, #Lcd# 1·164^9.

fylleðflôd m. _high tide_, #Gl#.

fyllewærc n. _epilepsy_, #Lcd# 65a.

fylling f. _filling, completion_, NC 291.

+fyllingtîd f. _compline_, WW 207^44n.

±fyllnes f. _fulness, plenitude, satiety_: _supplement_: _completion,
fulfilment_.

fyllo, fyllu f. _fulness (of food)_, _'fill,' feast, satiety_, _AO, B_;
CP: _impregnation_.

fylmen = filmen

fylnes I. (±) f. _fall, stumbling-block, offence_, NG: (+)
_transmigration_, MtL 1^12. II. = fyllnes

fýlnes = fûlnes

fylst I. fm. _help, aid_, _Mt_; Æ, AO. II. pres. 2 sg. of feallan. III.
pres. 2 sg. of fyllan.

+fylsta m. _helper_, Æ.

±fylstan (w. d.) _to aid, support, help, protect_, Æ, AO. [= fullæstan]
  [[headword spelled "full¯æstan"]]

±fylstend m. _helper_, Æ, #BRPs#.

fylt pres. 3 sg. of fealdan.

fylð I. pres. 3 sg. of fyllan. II. pres. 3 sg. of feallan.

fýlð f. _'filth,' uncleanness, impurity_, _Mt, Sc, W_. [fûl]

fylwêrig _faint to death_, B 963. [fiell]

fyn- = fin-

fýnd = fêond

+fýnd = +fîend

fyndele m. _invention, devising_, _Sc_. ['_findal_']

fyne m? n? _moisture, mould_, WW 183^19.

fynegian = fynigian

fynig (i) _mouldy_, _Æ_. ['_fenny_']

fynigian (e^2) _to become mouldy_, _LL_. ['_finew_']

fyr v. feorr.

fýr (î) n. '_fire_,' _Ex, G, VPs_; Æ, AO, CP: _a fire_, _Gen_.

fýran I. = fêran. II. _to cut a furrow_, OEG 2492n: _castrate_.

fýras = fîras

fýrb¯ære _fire-bearing, fiery_, OEG.

fýrbæð ¶ n. _fire-bath, hell-fire_.

fýrbend m. _bar forged in the fire_, B 722.

fýrbêta m. _fireman, stoker_, WW.

fýrbryne m. _conflagration_, AO 252^20.

fyrclian (ý?) _to flash, flicker_, #Chr# 1106.

fýrclomm m. _band forged in the fire_, #Sat# 39.

fýrcrûce f. _crucible_, Cp 963#c#.

fýrcynn n. _fire_, AO 252^20#c#.

fyrd = fierd

fyrdcræft m. _warfare_.

fyrdend _enrolled for military service_, ÆL 25^383.

fyrdesne m. _warrior_, BH 148^8.

fyrdfæreld n. fyrdfaru f. _going to war, military service_, LL.

fyrdgeatewe fp. _war-gear_, #Run# 27.

fyrdgemaca m. _fellow-soldier_, Æ.

fyrdgestealla ¶ m. _comrade in arms_.

fyrdgetrum ¶ n. _band of warriors_.

fyrdham m. _corslet_, B 1504.

fyrdhrægl n. _corslet_, B 1527.

fyrdhwæt ¶ _warlike, brave_.

fyrdian (ie) _to go on an expedition_, #Chr#.

fyrdlâf f. _remnant of an army_, ÆL 25^377.

fyrdlêas (ie) _without an army_, #Chr# 894#a#.

fyrdlêoð ¶ n. _war-song_.

fyrdlic _martial_, Æ.

fyrdmann m. _warrior_, #Bo#.

fyrdnoð (e) m. _liability to military service_, BC 3·71^7.

fýrdraca m. _fire-spewing dragon_, _B_ 2689. ['_firedrake_']

fyrdrian wv. _to serve in the army, go on active service_, ÆL 28^11.

fyrdrinc ¶ (e) m. _warrior, soldier_.

fyrdsceorp n. _armour_, #Rd# 15^13.

fyrdscip n. _battle-ship_, LL.

fyrdsearu ¶ n. _accoutrements_.

fyrdsôcn f. _military service_, Ct.

fyrdstemn m. _body of soldiers who serve for a fixed term, army-corps_,
#Chr# 921.

fyrdtîber n. _military sacrifice_? (Swt), WW 418^22; A 15·187.

fyrdtruma m. _martial band, army_, ÆH 1·442^34.

fyrdung (eo, i) f. _military expedition, armament_, _LL_; Æ: _camp_:
_fine for evading military service_, LL. ['_ferding_']

fyrdw¯æn (i) m. _military carriage_? EC 250^22.

fyrdweard f. _military watch_, LL 444[1].

fyrdwerod n. _host, army_, WW 399^30.

fyrdwîc n. _camp_, Æ.

fyrdwîsa m. _chieftain_, #Cra# 77.

fyrdwîse f. _military style_, #Nar# 9^28.

fyrdwîte n. _fine for evading military service_.

fyrdwyrðe _distinguished in war_, B 1316.

-fyrede v. twi-, ðri-f.

fyren == firen

fýren I. _of fire, fiery_, AO, CP: _on fire, burning, flaming_. II.
_fire_, #CPs#.

fýrenful _fiery_, #LPs#, W.

fyrengât (WW 423^11) = firgengât

fýrentâcen n. _fiery sign_, MFH 131^12.

fýrentâcnian '_compellere_' (?) RHy 6^21.

fýrenðecele f. _firebrand_, BH 476^15.

fyres = fyrs

fyrest = fyrst, fyrmest superl. adj.

fyrewyt = fyrwit

fýrfeaxen _fiery-haired_, WW.

fýrfôda (î) m. _fuel, twigs for burning_, OEG 7^88.

fýrgearwunga fp. _materials for a fire_, WW 401^9.

fýrgebeorh n. _firescreen_? _protection from fire_? LL 455[17].

fýrgebræc n. _crackling of fire_, #Gen# 2560.

fyrgen == firgen

fýrgnâst m. _spark of fire_, #An# 1548. [_ON._ gneisti]

fyrh v. furh.

fýrhât _hot as fire, burning, ardent_, _El_. ['_firehot_']

fýrheard _hardened by fire_, B 305.

±fyrht I. _afraid, timid_. [forht] II. = freht

fyrht-an, -ian (fryht-, N) _to fear, tremble_, _DR_: (±) _frighten,
terrify_, _BH_. ['_fright_,' vb.]

fyrhtnes f. _fear_, AO.

fyrhto, fyrhtu (fryht-, N) f. _'fright,' fear, dread, trembling_, _Ps,
VHy_; Æ, AO, CP: _horrible sight_. [forht]

fyrhð == ferhð

±fyrhðe n., fyr(h)ð f. _wooded country_? _Ct_. ['_frith_']

fýrhûs n. _'caminatum,' house with a fireplace in it_? _WW_.
['_firehouse_']

fýrhwêolod v. fêowerhwêolod.

fyrian (B 378) = ferian

fýrian I. _to supply with firing_, _LL_. ['_fire_' vb.] II. (±) _to cut
a furrow_. [furh]

fyrlen I. (eo, e) _far off, distant, remote_, Æ. II. n. _distance_, Æ.

fýrlêoht n. _gleam of fire_, B 1516. ['_firelight_']

fýrlêoma m. _gleam of fire_, #Sat# 128.

fýrlîce = f¯ærlîce

fýrloca m. _fiery prison_, #Sat# 58.

fyrm = feorm

fýrm¯æl m. _mark burnt in by fire_, #An# 1136.

fyrmest (o) superl. of forma I. _'foremost,' first_, _Æ, CP, Lcd_: _most
prominent, chief, best_, _El, Mt_. II. adv. _first of all, in the first
place, at first, most, especially, very well, best_.

fyrmð f. _harbouring, entertainment_, LL: _cleansing, washing_. [feorm]

fyrn I. (i) adj. _former, ancient_, _Rd_. II. adv. (±) _formerly, of
old, long ago, once_, ÆL. ['_fern_']

±fyrndagas mp. _days of yore_, ÆL. frðd fyrndagum _old, aged_.

fyrnful = firenful

fyrngêar ¶ np. _former years_, _Gn, Ps_. ['_fernyear_']

fyrngêara ¶ adv. _formerly, of old_.

fyrn-geflit ¶ n. nap. -geflitu _former quarrel, old strife_.

fyrngeflita m. _old-standing enemy_, #Pa# 34.

fyrngemynd n. _ancient history_, #El# 327.

fyrngesceap n. _ancient decree_, #Ph# 360.

fyrngesetu § np. _former seat, habitation_.

fyrngestrêon n. _ancient treasure_, #Sol# 32.

fyrngeweorc ¶ n. _former, ancient work_.

fyrngewinn n. _primeval struggle_, B 1689.

fyrngewrit ¶ n. _old writings, scripture_.

fyrngewyrht n. _former work, fate_, #Gu# 944.

fyrngidd n. _ancient prophecy_, #El# 542.

fyrnian = firenian

fyrnlic _former, of times past_, Æ.

fyrnmann m. _man of old times_, B 2761.

+fyrnnes f. _antiquity_, NC 294.

fyrnsægen f. _old saying, ancient tradition_, #An# 1491.

fyrnsceaða m. _devil_, #An# 1348.

fyrnstrêamas ¶ mp. _ocean_.

fyrnsynn f. _sin of old times_, #Jul# 347.

fyrnum = firenum

fyrnweorc ¶ n. _work of old, creation_.

fyrnwita (eo^2) ¶ m. _sage, counsellor_.

fýr-panne, -ponne f. _'fire-pan,' brazier_, _Bl, MH, WW_.

fyrr v. feorr.

fýrrace (fêrrece) f. _fire-rake_, WW 273^6.

fyrran = feorran

fyrs I. m. _'furze,' gorse, bramble_, _Bo, WW_. II. n. = fers

fýrscofl f. '_fire-shovel_,' _WW_ 358^16.

fyrsian = feorsian

fýrsmeortende v. smeortan.

fyrsn = fiersn

fýrspearca m. _fire-spark_.

fyrst I. '_first_,' _Chr, Ex_: _foremost, principal, chief_, _LL_. II.
adv. _in the first place, firstly, at first, originally_, _Ct_. III. (Æ)
= first I. and II.

+fyrst n. _frost_, LL 454[11].

fyrst- = forst-, first-

fýrstân m. _'firestone,' stone used for striking fire, flint_, _WW_.

fýrsweart _black with smoke_, #Cr# 984.

fýrtang f. '_(fire-)tongs_,' A 9·263.

fýrtorr m. _beacon, lighthouse_, WW.

fýrðling = fêorðling

fýrðolle f? _furnace, stage on which martyrs were burned_, OEG.

±fyrðran (#Gl#, AO), fyrðian (_Bo_; Æ) _to 'further,' urge on, advance,
promote, benefit_.

fyrðringnes f., fyrðrung (_Lcd_; W) f. _furtherance, promotion_.
['_furthering_']

fyrwet = fyrwit

fyrwetful _curious, anxious_.

fyrwetgeorn _curious, anxious, inquisitive_. adv. -lîce (GD 174^28).

fyrwetgeornes f. _curiosity_, #Bl# 69^22.

fyrwit I. n. _curiosity, yearning_, Æ. II. adj. _curious, inquisitive_.

fyrwitnes f. _curiosity_, Æ.

fýrwylm m. _wave of fire_, B 2672.

±fýsan _to send forth, impel, stimulate_: _drive away, put to flight,
banish_: (usu. reflex.) _hasten, prepare oneself_, _An, Gen_. ['_fuse_']

fýsian (ê) _to drive away_, _LL, W_. ['_feeze_']

fýst (ê) f. '_fist_,' _Æ, OET_; CP.

fýstgebêat n. _blow with the fist_, CP 315.

+fýstlian _to strike with the fist_, #Sc# 7^14.

fýstslægen _struck with the fist_, WW 396^33.

fyðer- = fiðer-, fêower-

fyðera, fyðeras, fyð(e)ru, nap. of fiðere.

fyx = fisc

fyxe (OET) f. _she-fox, vixen_.

fyxen (i) I. f. _she-fox, vixen_. II. adj. _of a fox_.

fyxenhýd (i) f. _she-fox's skin_.




=G=


gâ imperat. and pres. 1 sg. ind. of gân.

gab- (#Gl#) = gaf

gabote (u^2) f. _side-dish_, #EGl#. [_L._ gabata]

gâd I. ¶ n. _lack, want, need, desire_. [_Goth._ gaidw] II. f. _'goad,'
point, arrow-head, spear-head_, _Cp, Sol_.

±gada m. _comrade, companion_, ÆL. [_Ger._ gatte]

gaderian (Æ) = gadrian

±gaderscipe (æ) m. _matrimony_, OEG.

gadertang _continuous, united_.

gadertangnes (æ) f. _continuation_.

±gaderung (æ) f. _gathering together_: '_gathering_,' _Lcd_: _union_,
BH: _assembly_, _A, Jn_.

+gaderwyrhtan np. _assembled workmen_, ÆL 6·186.

gâd-îren (LL 455, 15), -îsen n. _goad_.

gador = geador

±gadori(ge)an = gadrian

±gadorwist f. _companionship_, WW.

±gadrian (æ) _to 'gather,' unite_: (+) (refl.) _assemble_, _Chr_:
_collect, store up_, _An, G, Ps_; Æ, CP: _pluck (flowers, etc.)_:
_compile_: (+) _associate (with)_: (+) _concentrate (thoughts)_, #Bo#.
[geador]

g¯æ = gêa

g¯æc = gêac

gæd n. _society, fellowship_, #Sol# 449.

g¯æd = gâd I.

gædeling ¶ m. _kinsman, fellow, companion in arms, comrade_, _B, Da_.
['_gadling_']

gæder- = gader-

gædr- = gadr-

gæf = geaf pret. 3 sg. of giefan.

gæfe = giefu

gæfel I. = geafl I. II. (_MtL_) = gafol

g¯æfon = gêafon pret. pl. of giefan.

-g¯ægan v. for-, ofer-g.

gæglb¯ærnes = gagolb¯ærnes

g¯ælan _to hinder, impede, keep in suspense_, CP: (intr.) _linger,
delay_. [gâl]

gæleð pres. 3 sg. of galan.

g¯æling f. _delay_, CP 39^1.

g¯ælnes = gâlnes

g¯ælsa (ê) m., g¯æls? (OEG 611) f. _pride, wantonness, luxury_, Æ, W:
_(worldly) care_, MtL 13^22: _a greedy person_. [gâl]

g¯ælslic '_luxuriosus_,' NC 291.

gælð pres. 3 sg. of galan.

gæmnian = gamenian

g¯æn- = gêan-

-g¯ænan v. tô-g.

+gænge = +genge

g¯æp = gêap

gær- = gear-, græ-

g¯ær == gêar

g¯æred _wedge-shaped_, BC 3·251´. [gâr]

-g¯ærede v. twi-, ðri-g.

gærs (græs) n. _'grass,' blade (of grass)_, _herb, young corn, hay,
plant_, _An, Cp, CP_; Æ.

gærsama = gærsuma  [[under "gærsum"]]

gærsbedd n. _(grass-bed), grave_, #PPs# 102^15.

gærscîð m. _blade of grass_, AO 38^11.

gærsgrêne _grass-green_, WW 199^24.

gærs-hoppa m., -hoppe (e^1) f. _'grasshopper,' locust_, _MtR_ (græs-),
_Ps, VPs_ (e).

gærsstapa = gærstapa

gærsswýn n. _pasturage-swine_, LL 445[2].

gærstapa m. _grasshopper, locust_, Æ, AO.

gærstûn m. _grass-enclosure, meadow_, _LL_. ['_garston_']

gærstûndîc m. _meadow-dike_, Ct.

gærsum mn., gærsuma f. _jewel, costly gift, treasure, riches_, _Chr_.
['_gersum_']

gærswyrt f. _'herba,' grass_, #APs# 36^2.

gærsyrð f. _pasturage in return for ploughing, labour_, LL 447, 4, lc.
['_grassearth_']

g¯æsne (ê, êa) w. g. or on. _deprived of, wanting, destitute, barren,
sterile_, _An, Cr_: _dead_. ['_geason_']

gæst (a, e, i, ie, y) m. (nap. gastas) _stranger_, _MtL_ (e), _Rd_:
'_guest_,' _B, Gen_ (ie); RB (y): (¶) _enemy_.

g¯æst I. m. == gâst. II. pres. 2 sg. of gân.

gæstærn (e^1, y^1, e^2) n. _guest-chamber_: _inn_.

g¯æstan _to frighten_, _Jul_ 17. ['_gast_']

gæsthof n. _guest-house_, #Cr# 821.

gæsthûs (ie) n. _'guest-house,' guest-chamber, inn_, _Mk_. [_Ger._
gasthaus]

gæstlic ¶ _hospitable_: _inhospitable, dreary_? #Wa# 73.

gæstlîðe (i^1) _hospitable_.

gæstlîðnes f. _hospitality_: _shelter, home_, ANS 122·248.

gæstmægen (i^1) n. _band of guests_? #Gen# 2494.

gæstsele (e, y) ¶ m. _guest-hall_.

g¯æsð = gâst

gæt = geat

g¯æt nap. of gât.

g¯ætan = gêatan

g¯æten _of or belonging to a goat_.

g¯æð pres. 3 sg. of gân.

gaf = geaf pret. 3 sg. of giefan.

gafel = gafol

gafelian _to rent (land)_, _Ct_. ['_gavel_']

gafellic (WW 403^21) = gafollic

gafelro(n)d (WW 204^33) = gafolrand

gafeluc m. _spear, javelin_, _OEG, WW_; ÆL. ['_gavelock_']

gaffetung f. _scoffing, mocking_, Æ.

gafol (æ, ea^1; e, u^2) I. n. gs. gafles _tribute, tax, duty_, _AO, Gl,
MtL_ (æ): _interest, profit, rent_, _Gl_ (æ), _Mt_; Æ. [giefan] II. f.
_fork_, OET 463 (v. A 36·60). ['_gavel_']

gafolbære m. _barley paid as rent_, TC 145^2.

gafolgerêfa (æ^1, e^2) m. _taxgatherer_, MtR.

gafolgielda (AO) (i^3, y^3) m. _tributary, tenant, debtor_.

gafolgyld n. _'fiscus,' revenue_? GPH 395.

gafolgyldere m. _tributary_, Æ.

gafolheord f. _taxable swarm (of bees)_, LL 448[5].

gafolhwîtel m. _tribute-blanket, a legal tender instead of coin for the
rent of a hide of land_, LL 108[44,1].

gafolland n. _leased land, land let for rent or services_, LL 126[2].

gafollic _fiscal_, OEG 6^20.

gafolm¯æd f. _meadow which was mown as part of the rent_, TC 145^3.

gafolmanung (ea^1, o^3) f. _place of tribute or custom_, MkR 2^14.

gafolpenig m. _tribute-penny_, LL 446.

gafolr¯æden f. _tribute, rent_, LL.

gafolrand m. _compasses_. [gafol II. +rind? A 36·59]

gafolswân m. _swine-herd who paid rent in kind for permission to
depasture his stock_, LL 448[6].

gafoltîning f. _fencing-wood given as part of the rent_, TC 145^8.

gafolwydu m. _firewood supplied as part of the rent_, TC 145^6.

gafolyrð f. _land subject to tribute, rented land_, LL 447.

±gafspr¯æc f. _foolish speech, scurrility_, ÆL.

gaful = gafol

gagâtes, gagâtstân (WW 148^5) m. _agate, jet_, _BH_. ['_gagate_']

gagel m? _'gale,' bog-myrtle_, _Lcd_; Mdf.

gagelcroppan mpl. _tufts of gale_, #Lcd# 33a.

gagelle, gagolle f. = gagel

gagol = (1) gâl; (2) gagel

gagolb¯ærnes (gægl-) f. _wantonness_, CP.

gagulswillan _to gargle_, #Gl#.

gâl I. n. _lust, luxury, wantonness, folly, levity_. II. adj. _gay,
light, wanton_, _Bo, BH_: _proud, wicked_. ['_gole_']

±galan^6 _to sing, call, cry, scream_, _B, Met_: _sing charms, practice
incantation_. ['_gale_']

galder- = galdor-

galdor (ea) n. _magic song, incantation, spell, enchantment_, Æ.

galdorcræft m. _occult art, incantation, magic_.

galdorcræftiga m. _wizard_, LL 38[30].

galdorcwide m. _incantation_, #Rd# 49^7.

galdorgalend _using enchantments_, WW.

galdorgalere m. _wizard_, WW 346^15.

galdorlêoð n. _incantation_.

galdorsang m. _incantation_, W 253^10.

galdorword n. _magic word_, #Rim# 24.

galdre m. _wizard, magician_.

galdrigge f. _enchantress_, #Gl#.

galdru nap. of galdor.

galend m. _enchanter_, #VPs#.

galere m. _wizard, snake-charmer_, WW.

gâlferhð _wanton, licentious_, #Jud# 62.

gâlfrêols m. _revel, 'lupercalia,'_ OEG.

gâlful _wanton, lustful, luxurious_. adv. -lîce.

galg- = gealg-

gâlian _to be wanton_, #Sc# 87^10.

Galilêisc _Galilean_.

galla (#VPs#; DR) = gealla

gallac = galloc

Galleas, Gallias mp. _Gauls, Franks, French_.

galled = gealled

gâllic _lustful_, _BH, Bo_; Æ. ['_golelich_']

Gallie = Galleas

Gallisc _Gaulish, French_.

galloc (u^2) m. _comfrey, gall-apple_.

gâlmôd _wanton, licentious_, #Jud# 256.

gâlnes f. _frivolity, wantonness, lust_, _Sc_; Æ. ['_goleness_']

gâlscipe m. _excess, luxury, lasciviousness, wantonness_, _Æ_: _pride_.
['_goleship_']

gâlsere m. _licentious person_, W 72^6.

gâlsm¯ære _frivolous, facetious, jocose_, RB 30^8. [v. '_smere_']

galung f. _incantation_, OEG 4940. [galan]

Galwalas mp. _Gauls, Frenchmen_: _France_.

gambe (o) ¶ f. _tribute_.

gamel == gamol

gamelic = gamenlic

gamen (o) n. _sport, joy, mirth, pastime_, _'game,' amusement_, _B, Bo_;
Æ, CP.

gamenian _to pun, play, joke_, _Æ, Sc_. ['_game_']

gamenlic _belonging to games, theatrical_, OEG. adv. -lîce _artfully_,
_Æ_. ['_gamely_']

gamenung f. _jesting, pastime_.

gamenwâðu (o^1) f. _merry journey_, B 854.

gamenwudu (o^1) ¶ m. _mirthful wood, harp_.

gamnian = gamenian

gamol ¶ _old, aged, hoary, ancient_. [ge-, m¯æl]

gamolfeax ¶ _grey-haired_.

gamolferhð _old, aged_, #Gen# 2867.

gân pret. 3 sg. of gînan.

±gân pret. 3 sg. êode, anv. _to 'go' ('i-go'), move, proceed, advance,
traverse, walk_, _Æ, BH, G_; CP: _happen, turn out, take place_, _Lk_:
(+) _gain, conquer, occupy, overrun_, AO: (+) _observe, practice,
exercise, effect_.

gandra m. _gander_, _ÆGr_; Ct.

ganet = ganot

gang I. (e, eo, o, u) m. _going, journey, progress, track, footprint_,
_B, Lcd, RB_; Æ: _flow, stream, way, passage, course, path, bed_, _AO,
Bl_: _drain, privy_, _Æ_: (in pl.) _platform, stage_, GPH 394.
['_gang_,' '_gong_'] II. imperat. and pret. sg. of gangan.

+gang n. _occurrence_, WW 394^9; _passage (lapse) of time_, GD 179^10.

gangan^7 (_B, Bl_) pret. geng (eo, a) = gân

gangdæg m. _one of the three processional days before Ascension day,
Rogation day_, _Chr_. ['_gangdays_']

gangehere = ganghere

gangelwæfre = gangewæfre  [[under "gangewifre"]]

gangern n. _privy_, WW 184^15. [ærn]

gangewifre (eo^1, o^1; æ^2; æ^3) f. _(a weaver as he goes), spider_.

ganggeteld n. _portable tent_, WW 187^3.

ganghere m. _army of foot-soldiers_, AO 154^24.

gang-pytt m., -setl n., -stôl m., -tûn m. (Æ) _privy_.

gangweg m. _thoroughfare_, _WW_. ['_gangway_']

gangwuce f. _Rogation week, the week of holy Thursday_, _Mk_.
['_gangweek_']

gânian _to yawn, gape, open_, _Ps_; #Gl#. ['_gane_']

ganot m. _'gannet,' sea-bird, water-fowl_, _B, Chr_. ganotes bæð _the
sea_.

ganra = gandra

gânung f. _yawning_, WW 162^37.

-gapian v. ofer-g.

gâr ¶ I. m. _'spear,' dart, javelin_, _B, PPs_. ['_gare_']
II. _tempest_? #Gen# 316. III. = gâra (Mdf).

gâra m. _corner, point of land, cape, promontory_, _AO_. [gâr; '_gore_']

gârbêam m. _spear-shaft_, #Ex# 246.

gârberend ¶ m. _warrior_.

gârcêne _bold in fight_, B 1958.

gârclife f. _agrimony_, #Lcd#.

gârcwealm m. _death by the spear_, B 2043.

gare = gearo

gârfaru ¶ f. _warlike expedition_.

gârgetrum _armed company_, #Cr# 673.

gârgewinn ¶ n. _fight with spears, battle_.

gârhêap m. _band of warriors_, #Ex# 321.

gârholt n. _shafted spear_, B 1835.

gârlêac n. '_garlic_,' _Lcd_; Æ.

gârmitting f. _battle_, ¶#Chr# 937.

gârnîð m. _conflict, war_, #GnE# 128.

gârr¯æs m. _battle_, #Ma# 32.

gârsecg m. _ocean, sea_, AO.

gârtorn m. _fighting rage_, #Sol# 145.

gâr-ðracu f. ds. -ðræce _battle_, #El# 1186.

gârðrîst ¶ _bold, daring_.

garuwe = gearwe

gâr-wiga ¶, -wîgend § m. _spearman, warrior_.

gârwudu m. _spear-shaft, lance_, #Ex# 325.

gâsrîc m. _savage person_? #Rune Casket#.

gast == gæst

gâst (¯æ) m. _breath_, _Ps, VPs_: _soul, spirit, life_, _Gen, Ex, Mt_;
CP: _good or bad spirit, angel, demon_, Æ; _BH, Mt_: _Holy Ghost_, _A,
Jn, VPs_: _man, human being_, _Gu_. ['_ghost_']

gâstan _to meditate_? AS 3^1.

gâstberend (æ) ¶ m. _living soul, man_.

gâstbona m. _soul-slayer, the Devil_, B 177.

gâstbrûcende _practising in the spirit_, Æ.

gâstcofa m. _breast_, #Leas# 13.

gâstcund (¯æ) _spiritual_, #Gu# 743.

gâstcwalu (¯æ) f. _torment, pains of hell_, #Gu# 651.

gâstcyning m. _soul's king, God_, #Gen# 2883.

gâstedom (¯æ) _spirituality_, MFH 112.

gâstgedâl ¶ n. _death_.

gâstgehygd ¶ n. _thought_.

gâstgemynd (¯æ) n. _thought_, #Gu# 574.

gâstgenîðla (¯æ) m. _devil_, #Jul# 245.

gâstgerýne ¶ n. _spiritual mystery_: _thought, consideration_.

gâstgewinn (¯æ) § n. _soul-torment, pains of hell_.

gâstgifu f. _special gift of the Holy Spirit_ (e.g. gift of tongues),
WW 200^8.

gâsthâlig ¶ _holy in spirit, holy_.

gâstlêas _lifeless, dead_, _El_. ['_ghostless_']

gâstlic _spiritual, holy_, _A, Æ_; CP: _clerical (not lay)_, _BH_; CP,
Æ: _ghastly, spectral_, _Nic_. adv. -lîce _spiritually_, Æ.
['_ghostly_']

gâstlufu (¯æ) ¶ f. _spiritual love_.

gâstsunu ¶ m. _spiritual son_. Godes g. _Christ_.

gat = geat

gât f. gs. g¯æte, gâte, nap. g¯æt, gêt _she-_'goat,' _Cr, Ep, Lcd, Rd_.

gâtahierde = gâthyrde

gâtahûs n. _goat-house_, WW 185^8.

gâtbucca m. _he-goat_, _WW_. ['_goat-buck_']

gâteh¯ær n. _goat's hair_, Æ.

gâtetrêow n. _cornel tree_? #Lcd# 32b.

gâthyrde (io) m. '_goat-herd_,' _LL_.

gatu v. geat.

gâð pres. pl. of gân.

ge conj. _and, also_. ge...ge _both...and, not only...but also_;
_whether...or_. ¯æg(hwæ)ðer ge...ge _both...and_; _either...or_.

ge- prefix (indicated by the sign + in this Dict.), original meaning
_together_; but it has usually lost all collective or intensitive force.

gê I. (îe) pron. 2 pers. pl., dp. êow. ap. êow(ic) _'ye,' you_. II. =
gêa

gêa adv. _'yea,' yes_, BH.

geabul = gafol

gêac m. _cuckoo_. [v. '_gowk_,' '_yeke_']

gêacessûre f. _wood-sorrel_, #Gl#.

geador _unitedly, together_.

geadrung f. _text_, MtL p8^17.

geaduling = gædeling

geaf pret. 3 sg. of giefan.

geaf- = gif-

geafl = (1) gafol; (2) ceafl

geafol == gafol

gêafon pret. pl. of giefan.

geafu = giefu

gêagl I. mn. _jaws, throat, gullet_, #Lcd#. II. = gâl

gêaglisc (¯æ, ê) _light, wanton_, BH 400^13.

gêaglswile m. _swelling of the jaws_, #Lcd#.

geagn- = gegn-

gêahl = gêagl

gêahð = gêað

geal pret. 3 sg. of giellan.

gealâdl f. _gall-disease, jaundice_, #Lcd# 40b.

gêalâgê (gêa lâ gêa, AS) _yea, amen_, RHy.

geald pret. 3 sg. of gieldan.

geald- = gald-

gealg _sad, gloomy, rebellious_.  [[from first edition]]

gealga (a) m. _'gallows,' cross_, _B, Jul, WW_; CP.

gealgian = geealgian  [[listed as "±ealgian"]]

gealgmôd ¶ _sad, gloomy, angry_.

gealgtrêow (a) n. _'gallows-tree,' gallows, cross_, _B, DR_.

gealh == gealg

gêalhswile = gêaglswile

gealla (a, e) m. I. _'gall,' bile_, _Mt, VPs, WW_; Æ, CP. II. _a galled
place on the skin_, _Lcd_. ['_gall_'] (I. and II. possibly the same
word.)

geallâdl f. '_melancholia_,' v. OEG 7^223.

gealled _'galled' (of horses)_, _Lcd_.

geallig '_acris, tristis_,' #HGl# 456.

gealp pret. 3 sg. of gielpan.

gealpettan (a) _to boast_, NC 291.

gealpettung (æ) f. _boastfulness_, NC 291.

gêamrung (#VPs#) = gêomrung

gêamung = gêmung

gêan = gên

gêana = gêna

gêan-, see also gegn-

geanbôc? f. _duplicate charter, counterpart_.

gêancyme (ê) m. _meeting_, #EPs# 63^3, ARSHy.

  [[Entry before author's corrections:
  gêancyme (ê) m. _meeting_, #EPs# 63^3, ARSHy: _coming back, return_:
  '_adinventio_,' RHy 1^4.]]

gêancyrr m. (-cyrnes? f. #RPs# 18^7) _meeting_, _SPs_ 18^7: _return_.
['_gainchare_']

gêanfær n. _going again, return_.

gêangang (¯æ) _return_? LL 8[84].

gêangewrit (ê) '_rescriptio_,' OEG 862.

gêanhweorfan^3 _to return_, #HGl#.

gêanhworfennes f. _return_, #HGl# 470.

gêanhwurf m. _return_, OEG 559.

gêanhwyrft (¯æ) m. _turning again_, #LPs# 125^1.

gêannes f. _meeting_, #HGl# 513.

gêanoð? _complaint_, OEG xiv. [_Goth._ gaunôðus]

gêanryne m. _meeting_, #ERLPs# 58^6.

gêanðingian _to reply_, #Gen# 1009.

geanwyrde _known, acknowledged, confessed_.

gêap I. (¯æ, ê) _open, wide, extensive, broad, spacious, lofty, steep,
deep_: _bent, crooked_: _deceitful, cunning_. II. pret. 3 sg. of gêopan.

gêapes (gs. of gêap) adv. _wide_.

gêaplic _deceitful, cunning_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ.

gêapneb adj. _(epithet of corslet) meshed_, #Wald# 2^19 (?= *gêapweb
_wide-meshed_).

-gêapnes v. wær-g.

gêapscipe m. _cleverness, cunning, craft, deceit, trickery,
artifice_, Æ.

gêapweb v. gêapneb.

gear pret. 3 sg. of georran.

gêar (ê, ¯æ) nm. '_year_,' Æ, AO, CP. tô gêare _in this year_: _yearly
tribute_: _name of the rune for =g=_.

geara = gearwe

geara- = gearo-

gêara _of 'yore,' formerly, in former times, once, long since_, AO, CP.
(gp. of gêar)

±gearcian _to prepare, procure, supply_, ÆL. [gearo]

gearcung f. _preparation_.

±gearcungdæg m. _preparation-day, day before the Sabbath_, G.

gêarcyning m. _consul_, WW 375^2.

geard I. m. _'yard,' enclosure, court, residence, dwelling, land_, Mdf.
in geardum _at home, in the world_: _hedge_, GD, MtR. II. = gierd

gêardagas ¶ mp. _lifetime_; _days of yore, former days_.

gêardagum ¶ adv. _formerly, in days of old, once_.

geare = gearwe I. and II.

geare- = gear-, gearo-

gêare = gêara

gêarfæc n. _space of a year_, W 72^1.

gearfoð == earfoð

gêargemearc n. _space of a year_, #Gu# 1215.

gêargemynd n. _yearly commemoration_, NC 292.

gêargeriht n. _yearly due_, W 113^9.

gêargerîm (¯æ) n. _number of years_, v. ES 39·342.

gêargetal (æ^1) n. _number of years_, #Lcd# 2·284.

gêarhwamlîce _yearly_, EC 226^6.

gêarlêac = gârlêac

gêarlic _yearly, of the year, annual_, Æ. adv. -lîce, CP.

gearlîce = gearolîce

gêarm¯ælum _year by year_, #Met# 1^5.

gêarmarcet n. _annual fair_, TC 372^15.

gearn (e) n. _'yarn,' spun wool_, #Gl#.

gearnful (NG) = geornful

gearnung = geornung

gearnwinde f. _yarn-winder, reel_, #Gl#, LL 455[15].

gearo (gearu) I. (wk gearwa) gsmn. -(o)wes; asm. gearone; napn. gearu
_prepared, ready, equipped, finished_, #Chr#, W. ['_yare_'] II. = gearwe
adv.

gêaro = gêara

gearobrygd f. _quick movement, deft playing (of an instrument)_,
#Cra# 50.

gearofolm _with ready hand_, B 2085.

gearolîce _readily, fully, clearly_.

gearor comp. of gearo adj. and gearwe adv.

gearo-snotor, -snottor ¶ _very skilful_.

gearoðoncol _ready-witted_, #Jud# 342.

gearowes gsmn. of gearo.

gearowita m. _intellect, understanding_, #Bo#.

gearowitolnes (a^2) f. _sagacity_, W 53^16.

gearowyrdig _ready of speech_, #Mod# 51.

gêarrîm n. _number of years_, AO.

gêartorht _perennially bright_, #Gen# 1561.

gêarðênung f. _annual service_, LL 382[38].

gearu == gearo

gearw- = gearaw-

gearugangende _going swiftly_, #Rd# 41^17.

gearuw- = gearw-

gearwan = gierwan

gearwanlêaf = geormanlêaf

gearwe I. adv. comp. gear(w)or; sup. gear(w)ost _well, effectually,
sufficiently, thoroughly, entirely_, Æ, AO, CP. [_Ger._ gar] II. ¶ f.
(usu. pl.) _clothing, equipment, ornament, trappings, harness, armour_.
III. (a, æ) f. '_yarrow_,' #Lcd# 147a.

±gearwian (æ, e, i, ie, y) _to equip, prepare, make ready_, Æ, CP:
_construct, erect, make_: _procure, supply_: _clothe, adorn_.

±gearwung f. _preparation_: _parasceve_.

gearwungdæg (eo^1) m. _parasceve_, JnR.

+gearwungnes f. _preparation_.

gearwutol _austere_, LkL 19^21,22.

gêasceaft v. gêosceaft.

gêasne (_Jul_) = g¯æsne

geat n. (æ, e) nap. gatu (geatu #VPs#) _'gate,' door, opening_, _Æ, BH,
Bl, G_; AO, CP; Mdf.

gêat pret. 3 sg. of gêotan.

gêatan (¯æ, ê, êo) _to say 'yea,' consent, grant, confirm_. [gêa]

geatolic ¶ _adorned, splendid, magnificent, stately_.

geattorr ¶ m. _gate-tower_.

geatwa = geatwe

geatwan _to equip_, #Rd# 29^6.

geatwe fp. _arms, equipments, trappings, ornaments_: _organs, members_.

geatweard m. _gate-keeper, door-keeper, porter_, _Jn_. ['_gateward_']

gêað ¶ f. _foolishness, mockery_. [gêac]

gebellic (OET, Cp 881) = gafollic

gêc (OET) = gêoc

gecel, gecile (#Gl#) = gicel

ged = gæd, gidd

gedd == gidd

gederian = (1) gaderian; (2) derian

gee = gêa

gef = (1) geaf pret. 3 sg. of giefan; (2) (N) gif

gef- = gief-

gêglesc = gêaglisc

gegn = gên

gegn- see also gêan-

gegncwide m. _reply, answer, retort_: (in pl.) _conversation_.

+gegnian _to meet_, DR.

gegninga = gegnunga

gegnpæð m. _opposing path_, #Rd# 16^26.

gegnslege m. _battle_, #An# 1358.

gegnum ¶ adv. _away, forwards, straight on, thither_.

gegnunga adv. _immediately, directly_: _certainly, plainly, precisely_:
_completely, fully_.

gegoð = geoguð

geher (NG) = êar

gehhol = geohol, gêol

gehðu ¶ (eo, i) f. _care, anxiety, grief_.

geld = gield

geld- = gild-, gyld-

gelde _sterile_, WW 226^22; 394^26.

gell- = geall-, giell-

gellet n? _bowl_, #Lcd# 122a.

gelm = gilm

gelo = geolu

gelostr = geolster

gelp == gielp

gêlsa = g¯ælsa

gelt (#KGl#) = gylt

gême- = gîeme-

gêmerian = gêomrian

gemme = gimm

gêmnes (#VPs#) = gîemenes

gemstân (ES 7·134) = gimmstân  [[headword spelled "gimstân"]]

gêmung (êa, î, ý) f. _marriage_, MtR, DR.

gêmungian _to marry_, DR 109^17.

gêmunglic _nuptial_, MtR, DR.

gên I. (îe) (A, rare in prose) adv. _yet, now, still, again_: _further,
besides, also, moreover_: _hitherto_. II. adj. _direct_.

gên- = gêan-, gêgn-

gêna = gên I.

gend == geond

gende = gengde pret. 3 sg. of gengan.

gênde = gôiende v. gôian.

geng I. = geong. II. = gang. III. pret. 3 sg. of gangan.

+genga m. _fellow-traveller, companion_, W.

gengan, pret. gengde _to go_. [gong]  [[under "gang"]]

±genge I. _prevailing, effectual, appropriate_, _BH, Gu_. ['_genge_']
II. n. _troop_, _Chr_; FBO, W: _privy_. ['_ging_']

-gengel v. æfter-, for(e)-g.

genigend = giniend pres. ptc. of ginian.

gêno, gênu = gên

gêo (îu) adv. _once, formerly, of old, before, already, earlier_, CP
(gîo). [_Goth._ ju]

geoc n. '_yoke_,' Æ, AO, CP: _yoke of oxen_: _a measure of land_, OET
(Ct): _consort_, NG.

gêoc (êoc) f. _help, support, rescue_: _safety_: _consolation_.

geocboga m. _yoke-bow, yoke_.

gêocend ¶ m. _preserver, Saviour_.

geocian (iuc-) _to yoke, join together_.

gêocian (w. g. or d.) _to preserve, rescue, save_.

geocled n. geocleta (ioc-) m. _a measure of land_, OET (Ct),
v. LL 2·527.

gêocor ¶ _harsh, terrible_: _bitter, sad_. adv. gêocre.

geocsa m. _sob_, #Met# 2^5.

geocstecca _part of a yoke_ (Swt), _bolt of a door, bar_ (BT), #Gl#.
[sticca]

geocsung f. _sobbing_, WW 179^4.

geoctêma (ioc-) m. _animal yoked with another_, WW 106^36.

geocða = gicða

gêod¯æd ¶ (iû-) f. _deed of old, former deed_.

geof = gif

geof- = gief-, gif-

geofen = geofon

geofena gp. of geofu = giefu

geofon (i, y) ¶ n. _ocean, sea_.

geofonflôd m. _ocean flood_, #Az# 125.

geofonhûs n. _ship_, #Gen# 1321.

geogað = geoguð

gêo-gêara, -gêare adv. _of old_.

gêoglere, gêogelere m. _juggler, magician_, W 98^9; #HGl#. [_Ger._
gaukler]

geogoð (Æ, AO) == geoguð

geoguð f. '_youth_,' Æ: _young people_, CP: _junior warriors_
(_as opposed to_ duguð): _young of cattle_.

geoguðcnôsl n. _young offspring_, #Rd# 16^10.

geoguðfeorh ¶ n. _time of youth_.

geoguð-hâd m., -hâdnes f. _state of youth_.

geoguðlic _youthful_.

geoguðlust m. _youthful lust_, #Bl# 59^9.

geoguðmyrð f. _joy of youth_, #Rd# 39^2.

geoguðtêoðung f. _tithe of calves_.

geohol, geohhol = gêol

geoh(h)el- = gêol-

geohsa = geocsa

geoht (iuht) n. _yoke_, v. OEG 7^135.

geohðu = gehðu

gêol n., gêola m. _'Yule'-tide, Christmas_. ¯ærra gêola _December_.
æftera gêola _January_.

geolca = geoloca

geold = gield

gêoldæg (geoh(h)el-) m. _Yule-day, day at Yuletide_.

gêolêan (iû-) n. _reward for past deed_, #Wald# 2^7.

geoleca = geoloca

geolerêad = geolurêad

geolhstor = geolster

gêolmônað (iûl-) m. _December_.

geolo = geolu

geoloca, geol(e)ca m. '_yolk_,' Æ. [geolu]

geolorand ¶ m. _buckler covered with yellow linden-bark_.

geol-ster, -stor mn. _matter, pus, poison, poisonous humour, disease_,
OEG.

geolstrig _secreting poison, purulent_, OEG.

geolu gmn. geolwes '_yellow_.'

geoluhwît _pale yellow_.

geolurêad _reddish yellow_, WW 375^18.

±geolwian _to become yellow_.

gêomann (îu) ¶ m. _man of past times_.

gêomêowle (îo) ¶ f. _aged wife_? B.

gêomer- = gêomor-, gêomr-

gêomor _troubled, sad, miserable_. adv. -more.

gêomorfrôd _very old_, #Gen# 2224.

gêomorgidd ¶ n. _dirge, elegy_.

gêomorlic _sad, painful_, AO. adv. -lîce.

gêomormôd _sorrowful_, Æ.

gêomornes f. _tribulation_, #LPs# 118^143.

gêomorung = gêomrung

gêomrian _to be sad, complain, lament, bewail, mourn_, Æ, AO, CP.

gêomrung f. _lamentation, groaning, moaning, grief_, Æ.

gêomur = gêomor

geon adv. '_yon_,' CP.

geon- = geond-

gêona (NG) = gêna, gên

geonað pres. 3 sg. of geonian.

geond (e, i, y) I. prep. (w. a. and, rarely, d.) _throughout, through,
over_. geond...innan _throughout_: _up to, as far as, during_. II. adv.
_yonder, thither_.

geondan prep. (w. a.) _beyond_.

geondblâwan^7 (i^1) _to inspire, illuminate_.

geondbr¯ædan _to spread over, cover entirely_, B 1239.

geonddrencan (i^1) _to drink excessively, get drunk_, #KGl# 58^40.

geondeardian _to inhabit_, #RPs# 32^8.

geondfaran^7 _to traverse, pervade_, Æ.

geondfêolan^3 (only in pp. geondfolen) _to fill completely_, #Gen# 43.

geondfêran _to traverse_: _surpass_, ÆL 23b^333.

geondflôwan^7 _to flow over or through_, #Hell# 105.

geondflôwende _ebbing and flowing_, OEG 2363.

geondfolen v. geondfêolan.

geond-gân anv., -gangan^7 _to traverse, go round_.

geondgêotan^2 _to pour, pour upon, suffuse_, Æ.

geondhweorfan^3 ¶ _to traverse, pass over, pass through_.

geondhyrdan _to harden thoroughly_.

geondlâcan^7 _to traverse, flow over_, #Ph# 70.

geondleccan _to water_, #LPs# 103^13.

geond-leccung (gynd-) f. _moistening, watering_, #Sc# 27^7.

geond-lîhtan (CP), -lýhtan _to illuminate, enlighten_, CP.

geondlîhtend m. _illuminator_, DHy 128^5.

geondmengan _to confuse, bewilder_, #Sol# 59.

geondsâwan^7 _to strew, scatter_.

geondscêawian _to survey, consider, reflect upon, review_.

geondscînan^1 _to shine upon, illuminate_.

geondscrîðan^1 _to pass through, traverse, stride to and fro_, MFH 163;
W 250^3.

geondscrîðing f. _course, passage_, OEG 263.

geond-sêcan pret. 3 sg. -sôhte _to search thoroughly_: _pervade_.

geondsendan _to overspread_.

geondsêon^5 _to examine_, B 3087.

geondsmêagan _to investigate, examine, discuss_.

geondsp¯ætan _to squirt through_, #Lcd# 78a.

geondsprengan _to besprinkle_.

geondspringan^3 _to penetrate_, OEG 2840.

geondsprûtan^2 _to pervade_, #Cr# 42.

geond-spurnan, -spyrnian _to cause to stumble_, NG.

geond-stregdan, -strêdan _to scatter, suffuse, besprinkle_, Æ.

geondstyrian _to stir up, agitate_, #Met# 6^15.

geondðencan ¶ _to reflect upon, consider_.

geondwadan^6 (i^1) _to know thoroughly, be versed in_, CP 9^10.

geondwlîtan^1 _to look over, contemplate, examine, scan_.

geondyrnan^3 _to run over_, #ÆGr# 277^3.

geong I. (e, i, u) comp. gingra; superl. gingest _'young,' youthful_, Æ,
AO, CP: _recent, new, fresh_: (superl.) _last_, B. II. (NG) = gang. III.
= geng pret. 3 sg. of gangan.

geongan = gangan

geongerdôm = geongordôm

geongewifre = gangewifre

geongl¯æcan (gyng-, iung-) _to pass one's youth_, #HGl# 508; OEG 4361.

geonglic _young, youthful_, Æ.

geonglicnes f. _youth_.

geongling (iu-) m. _youth_, #ÆGr# 3^1.

geongordôm ¶, geongorscipe § m. _discipleship, allegiance_. [_OS._
jungardôm; jungarskepi]

geongra (i) m. _youth_: _disciple, follower, dependant, servant,
vassal_, AO: _assistant, deputy_. [_Ger._ jünger]

geongre (i) f. _female attendant, assistant, deputy_, #Jud# 132.

geonian = ginian

geonlic (MF 103^20) = geonglic?

geonofer adv. _thither_.

geonsîð m. _departure hence, death_, MFH 163.

geonung = ginung

gêopan^2 _to absorb, swallow_, #Rd# 24^9.

geormanlêaf n. _mallow_.

geormenletic _mallow_, WW 135^27.

georn I. (usu. w. g.) _desirous, eager, earnest, diligent, studious_,
AO, CP. [_Ger._ gern] II. = gearn pret. 3 sg. of +iernan.

geornan = giernan

georne adv. _eagerly, zealously, earnestly, gladly_, Æ, AO, CP: _well,
carefully, completely, exactly_, Æ. [_Ger._ gern]

geornes = geornnes

georneste (WW 499^1) = eornoste

georn-ful, -fullic _desirous, eager, zealous, diligent_, AO, CP. adv.
-lîce, Æ.

geornfulnes f. _eagerness, zeal, diligence_, Æ, AO, CP: _desire_.

geornian = giernan

geornlic adj. _desirable_, AO. adv. -lîce _zealously, earnestly,
diligently, carefully_, Æ, CP.

geornnes f. _zeal, industry_: _evil desire, lust, wickedness_, NG.

geornung f. _yearning, desire_: _diligence_.

geornust- = eornost-

georowyrde (BH) = gearowyrdig

georran = gyrran

georst = gorst  [[under "gors"]]

georstandæg = gierstandæg

georstu interj. _O!_ #VPs#. [hîeran]

gêosceaft f. _destiny, fate_, B 1234.

gêosceaftgâst m. _doomed spirit_, B 1266.

geostra, geostran (ie, ei, y) _'yester' (-day, -night)_. [_Ger._
gestern]

gêot = gîet

-gêota v. lêad-g.  [[headword spelled "lêadgeota"]]

gêotan I. (sv^2) _to pour, pour forth, shed_, AO, CP: _flow, flood,
overwhelm_: (±) _found, cast_. [_Ger._ giessen] II. = gêatan

gêotend m. _artery_, WW 352^25.

gêotenlic _molten, fluid_, GPH 394.

gêotere m. _founder (of metal)_, AO 54.

-gêoting v. in-, on-g.  [[headword spelled "ongêotung"]]

gêotton pret. pl. of gêotan II.

geoðu = geohðu = gehðu

gêow = gîw

gêower (GPH 395) = êower

gêowian = +êowan = +îewan

gêowine (îu) m. _departed friend_, #Seaf# 92.

geoxa = geocsa

gêp == gêap

ger- = gær-, gearw-, gier-

gêr == gêar

gerd = gierd

gerd- = gyrd-

gerew-, gerw- = gearw-

gernwinde = gearnwinde

gêrscipe m. _jest_? #Rim# 11.

gês v. gôs.

gesca, gescea = geocsa

gêse (î, ý) adv. '_yes_.' [gêa, swâ]

gesen _entrails, intestines_, WW 231^39.

gêsine, gêsne = g¯æsne

gest = giest

gêst = gâst

gest- = gæst-, giest-

gêstende (OEG 2499) = ýstende  [[form of "ýstan"]]

get = geat

gêt I. = g¯æt nap. of gât. II. = gêat pret. 3 sg. of gêotan. III.
(#VPs#), gêta = gîet, gîeta

gêtan I. _to destroy, kill_, B 2940 (or? grêtan). II. = gêatan

gêtenwyrde _consenting, agreeing_. [gêatan]

gi- (NG, etc.) = ge-

gib = gif

giccan _to 'itch,'_ _Lcd_.

gicce '_itch_,' _Ln_ 33^3 (y).

giccig _purulent_, #HGl# 453.

gicel, gicela (y) m. _icicle, ice_, _DD, WW_. ['_ickle_']

gicelgebland n. _frost_, RHy 7^70.

gicelig _glacial, icy_, OEG.

gicelstân m. _hailstone_.

gicenes (y) f. _itching, itch_, #Gl#.

gicða (ie, io, y) m. _scab, itch, itching_, Æ, CP: _hiccough_, #Lcd#.

gid- = gyd-

gîd- = gît-

gidd (e, ie, y) n. _song, poem_: _saying, proverb, riddle_: _speech,
story, tale, narrative_.

±giddian (ie) _to speak formally, discuss_: _speak with alliteration,
recite, sing_, AO.

giddung f. _utterance, saying, prophecy, song, poetry, poetical
recitation, metre_, Æ.

gîe = gê

giecða (CP) = gicða?

giedd == gidd

gief (rare EWS) = gif

gief- = gif-

giefa (eo, i, y) m. _donor_, CP.

giefan^5 (e, eo, io; ea, ia (A), i, y) w. d. and a. _to 'give,' bestow_,
_B, Sol_; AO, CP: _commit, entrust_, _Da_: _give in marriage_, _Chr_.

giefend (e) m. _giver_, DR.

gîefernes (CP) = gîfernes

giefl (i, y) n. _morsel, food_.

giefnes (e) f. _pardon_, DR.

giefu (e, eo, i, y) f. _gift_, _B, Bo, Mt_; AO, CP. tô giefe, giefes
_gratis, freely_: _favour, grace_, _Bl, Lk_: _name of the rune for =g=_.
['_give_']

gield (eo, i) n. _service, offering, worship, sacrifice_:
_money-payment, tax, tribute, compensation, substitute_: _guild,
brotherhood_: _idol, god_.

±gieldan^3 (e, i, y) _to 'yield,' pay_, AO, CP: _pay for_: _reward,
requite, render_, AO, CP: _worship, serve, sacrifice to_: _punish_.

-gieldere (y) v. gafol-g.  [[under "gafolgyldere"]]

gieldra = ieldra comp. of eald.

-giella (e, i) v. stân-g.  [[under "stângella"]]

giellan^3 (e, i, y) _to 'yell,' sound, shout_.

gielp (e, i, y) mn. _boasting, pride, arrogance_: _fame, glory_, AO.

gielpan^3 (i, y) _to boast, exult_, CP. ['_yelp_']

gielpcwide ¶ m. _boastful speech_.

gielpen (i) _boastful_, CP.

gielpgeorn (i, y) _eager for glory_, BH 92^4.

gielpgeornes (i) f. _desire for glory_, W.

gielphlæden (i) _boastful_, B 868.

gielping (y) f. _glory_, #Sc# 144^11.

gielplic (i) _vainglorious, boastful_: _ostentatious, showy_. adv.
-lîce.

gielpna (i) m. _boaster_, CP.

gielpplega (y) m. _war_, #Ex# 240.

gielpsceaða ¶ (e^1, a^2) m. _arrogant, boastful enemy_.

gielpspr¯æc f. _boastful speech_, B 981.

gielpword (y) n. _boast_, AO.

gielt = gylt

giem = gimm

gîeman (ê, î, ý) (w. g. or a.) _to care for, heal_, CP: _take notice of,
take heed to, regard, observe_, AO, CP.

gîeme f. _care_.

gîemelêas (ê, ý) _careless, neglected, stray_, CP: _incurable_, MtL
p20^11.

gîemelêasian _to neglect, despise_.

gîemelêaslic _careless_, CP. adv. -lîce.

gîemelêasnes (ê, ý) f. _negligence_, BH 242^18.

gîeme-lêast, -lîest f. _carelessness, neglect_, CP.

gîemen (ê, î, ý) f. _care, oversight, heed, diligence, rule_, AO, CP.

gîemend (ý) m. _governor_, #Sc# 117^7.

gîem(e)nes (ê) f. _care, anxiety_, DR, NG.

gîeming f. _care, anxiety_, CP 129^20.

gîen = gên

gîena = gêna

giend = geond

giendan v. gynde.

gieng == geong

gierd (ea, i, y) f. _'yard,' rod, staff, twig_, CP: _rood (measure)_.
[_Ger._ gerte]

gierede pret. 3 sg. of gierwan.

±gierela (e, i, y) m. _dress, apparel_, AO, CP. [gearwian]

±gier(e)lian (e) _to clothe_.

+gierelic (e) adj. _of clothes_, WW 503^18.

gierian = gearwian

+giering f. '_directio_,' #RPs# 138^3.

±giernan (eo, y) (w. g.) _to 'yearn' for, strive, be eager, desire,
entreat, seek for, beg, demand_, AO, CP. [georn]

+giernendlic (y) _desirable_, #EPs# 18^11.

giernes = geornes

gierning (CP) = geornung

gierran = gyrran

gierstandæg (eo, y) m. _yesterday_. [giestran]

gierstenlic adj. _of yesterday_, DHy 47 (eo).

±gierwan (ea, y) _to prepare_: _cook_: _deck, dress, clothe_, AO, CP.

giest (æ, e, i, y) m. '_guest_,' _Gen, RB_ (y): _stranger_, _MtL_ (e),
_Rd_ (æ): (¶) _enemy_.

giesthûs (æ, y) n. '_guest house_,' _Mk_.

giestian (y) _to lodge, be a guest_.

giestig (e) adj. _being a stranger_, MtL 25^38.

giesting (e) f. _exile_, #Gl#.

giestning (e) f. _hospitality, lodging_, NC 296.

giestran adv. _yesterday_, #Rd# 41^44.

giestran¯æfen m. _yesterday evening_. adv. -¯æfene.

gîet I. (ê, î, ý) adv. _'yet,' still, besides, further, again,
moreover_. ðâ. g. _yet, still_. nû g. _until now_. II. pres. 3 sg. of
gêotan.

gîeta = gîet I.

-gietan v. be-g.

gîetsere = gîtsere

gîetsian = gîtsian

gif (e, ie, y) conj. (w. ind. or subj.) '_if_,' _B, G_, _etc._; CP:
_whether, though_, _B_.

gifa = giefa

gifan = giefan

gifect (#Gl#) = gefeoht  [[listed as "±feoht"]]

gifel = giefl

gifen I. pp. of giefan. II. = geofon

gîfer m. _glutton_, #Soul# 118.

gîfere = gîfre

gîferlîce _greedily_.

gîfernes f. _greediness, gluttony, avarice_, Æ, CP.

gifeðe I. _granted by fate, given_. II. n. _fate, lot_, B 3085.

giffæst _endowed, talented_: (w. g.) _capable of_.

gifheall f. _hall in which gifts were bestowed_, B 838.

gifian (ea, eo) _to present, endow_: _glorify_, DR 78^14: (+) _wait for,
expect_? DR 20^8.

gifig _rich_, A 11·171.

gifl = giefl

gifnes ¶ f. _grace, favour_.

gifol _liberal, generous, bountiful_, CP.

gifola m. _giver_, AS 2^13.

gifolnes (io) f. _liberality_.

gifre _useful_, #Rd# 27^28; 50^3.

gîfre _greedy, rapacious, ravenous_, CP: _desirous of_.

gifsceatt m. _present_, B 378.

gifstôl ¶ m. _gift-seat, throne_.

gift (y) nf. _what is given, price_, _'gift,' portion, marriage gift
(by the bridegroom)_, _dowry_: (pl.) _nuptials, wedding, marriage_, Æ.
[giefan]

giftbûr m. _bride-chamber_, #EPs# 18^5.

giftelic = giftlic

giftfeorm f. _marriage-feast_, NC 297.

gifthûs (y) n. _house at which a wedding is being celebrated_, Mt 22^10.

giftian (y) _to give in marriage (of the woman)_, G.

giftlêoð n. _epithalamium_, WW 165^33.

giftlic _nuptial, belonging to a wedding_, Æ.

gifu (Æ) = giefu

giful = gifol

gifung (y) f. _consent_, BH 86^25.

gîg (Cp 142#g#) = gîw

gîgant m. _giant_. [_L._ gigantem]

gîgantmæcg m. _son of a giant_, #Gen# 1268.

gigoð == geoguð

gîhsa = geocsa

gihða = gicða

gihðu = gehðu

gild = gield

gild- = gyld-

±gild (y) n. _'guild,' society_, _Ct_.

±gilda m. _member of a brotherhood of related persons_, v. LL 2·378;
445.

gildan = (1) gieldan; (2) gyldan

gilddagas mp. _guild-days, festival-days_.

gilde v. twi-g.

+gildheall (y) f. _guild-hall_, KC 4·277^21.

gildlic adj. _of a guild_.

gildr¯æden (y) f. _guild-membership_, Ct.

±gildscipe m. _guild, brotherhood_, _Ct, LL_. ['_guildship_']

gildsester (y) m. _measure of bulk belonging to a corporate body_, TC
606; 611.

gillan = giellan

gillister n. gillistre, f. _phlegm, pus, matter_, #Lcd#. [= geolster]

gilm, gilma (e) m. _handful_; _sheaf_.

gilp == gielp

gilt == gylt

gilte f. _young sow_, WW 119^25.

gim = gimm

gîm- = gîem-

gimb¯ære _gem-bearing_, OEG.

gimcynn n. _precious stone, gem_.

gimfæst (B 1272) = ginfæst

gimm (y) m. (occl. nap. gimme) _precious stone_, _'gem,' jewel_; _Æ, Bl,
VPs_; CP: (¶) _sun, star_. [_L._ gemma]

gimmian _to adorn with gems_.

gimmisc _jewelled_, #Nar# 5^13.

gimreced n. _bejewelled hall, palace_, #Met# 8^25.

gimrodor m. _draconite (precious stone)_, OEG.

gimstân m. _stone capable of being made into a gem, jewel_, _Æ_; AO.
['_gemstone_']

gîmung = gêmung

gimwyrhta m. _jeweller_, Æ (y).

gin I. n. _yawning deep_, #Ex# 430. II. adj. = ginn

gîn = gên

gîna = gêna

gînan^1 _to yawn_.

gind == geond

ginfæst ¶ _ample, liberal_. [ginn]

ging, gingest v. geong.

gingi-ber, -fer(e) f. '_ginger_,' _Lcd_.

gingra I. (Æ) v. geong. II. = geongra

gingre = geongre

ginian (eo, y) _to 'yawn,' gape, make a noise_, AO. [gînan]

ginn ¶ _spacious, wide, ample_.

ginnan = onginnan

ginnes f. _gap, interval_, Cp 373#i#.

ginnfæst = ginfæst

ginnwîsed (y) _very wise_, #Gu# 839?

ginung (eo, y) f. _gaping, yawning_, #Gl#.

gîo == gêo

giofol == gifol

giohðhâd = geoguðhâd

gîow = gîw

giowian (RG) = giwian

gipung = gypung

gir- = gearw-, geor-, gier-, gyr-

gird = gierd

giren (#VPs#) = grîn

girstbîtung = gristbîtung  [[headword spelled "gristbitung"]]

girwan = gearwian

+gîscan _to close, bolt, bar_, #Gl#.

giscian _to sob_, #Bo# 8^8.

gîse = gêse

gîsl, gîsel m. _hostage_, AO. [_Ger._ geisel]

gîslhâd m. _state of being a hostage_, Cp 99#o#.

gîslian _to give hostages_, #Chr#.

gist I. m. _'yeast,' froth_, #Lcd#. II. = gæst

gist- = gæst-, giest-

gîst = ýst

gistran = geostran  [[under "geostra"]]

gîstung = gîtsung

git dual of pron. 2 pers. (ðu); g. incer; d. inc; a. inc(it) _you two_.
git Johannis _thou and John_.

gît = gîet

gîta = gîeta

gitrife = giðrife  [[variant of "gýðrife"?]]

gîtsere m. _miser_, Æ, CP.

gîtsian (ý) _to be greedy, long for, covet_, Æ, CP: (+) _attain_, CP
364^22. [_Ger._ geizen]

gîtsiendlic _insatiable_, #RPs# 100^5.

gîtsung (ý) f. _avarice, greediness, covetousness, desire_, CP.

gîð- = gýð-

giðu = gehðu

gîu (Æ) == gêo

giu- = geo-

Gîuling _July_, Cp 70#q# (A 20·137).

gîw (êo) m. _griffin, vulture_, WW 258^7.

±giwian (î? v. A 16·98) _to ask_, NG.

giwung f. _petition_, N.

glâd pret. 3 sg. of glîdan.

glad- v. glæd.

gladian (ea) (¶) _to gleam, glisten_: (±) intr. _be glad, rejoice_,
_JnLR, Lcd_: (±) tr. _gladden, rejoice, gratify, appease_, _Æ, VPs_.
['_glad_']

gladine = glædene

gladung f. _rejoicing_, _RB_. ['_gladding_']

glæd I. (glad- in obl. cases) (¶) _bright, shining, brilliant,
gleaming_, _Gen, Ph, Sol_: _cheerful_, _'glad,' joyous_, _Cr_; Æ, CP:
_pleasant, kind, gracious_, _Æ, B, G_. II. n. _joy, gladness_, #Wy# 68.

glædene (a, e) f. _iris, gladiolus_, _Gl_; #Lcd#. ['_gladdon_']

gl¯ædestede = glêdstede

glædine (#Gl#) = glædene

glædlic _bright, shining_, _Wid_: _pleasant, agreeable_, _Ps_. adv.
-lîce _'gladly,' joyfully, kindly, willingly_, _BH_.

glædmôd _glad-hearted, cheerful, joyous_: _kind, gracious_.

glædmôdnes f. _kindness, bounty_, CP 391^6.

glædnes f. _'gladness,' joy_, _BH_; Æ, DR(+).

glædscipe m. _gladness, joy_.

gl¯ædstede = glêdstede

gl¯æm ¶ m. _'gleam,' brilliance, brightness, splendour, beauty_, _Gen,
Jul_: _a brilliant light_, _Gu_.

glæng == gleng

glær m. _amber, resin_, WW.

glæren _vitreous, glassy_. [glæs]

glæs n. nap. glasu, and (once) glæsas (GPH 397) '_glass_,' _Bo, Cr_; Æ.

glæsen _of glass, glassy_, _Bl_. ['_glassen_']

glæsenêage _grey-eyed_, WW 416^1.

glæsfæt n. _glass (vessel)_, BH 398^3 (#o#, #b#), GD 10^16.

glæsful m. _a glassful_, BH 398^3 (#t#).

glæshlûtor _clear, transparent_.

glæterian _to glitter_, OEG, WW.

glæterung f. _shining_, #RPs# 48^15.

glætlic = glædlic

gl¯æw = glêaw

glappe f. _burdock, buckbean_? #Lcd#.

glasu v. glæs.

glâw = glêaw

glêam m? n? _revelry, joy_, #Gen# 12.

glêaw (â, ¯æ, ê) _penetrating, prudent, wise, skilful_, _G, VPs_; Æ, AO,
CP: (¶)_good_. adv. -e. ['_glew_']

glêawferhð ¶ _prudent_.

glêawhycgende §, glêawhýdig ¶ _thoughtful, wise, prudent_.

glêawlic (¯æ, êo) _wise, prudent, diligent_. adv. -lîce.

glêawmôd _wise, sagacious_, CP.

glêawnes (¯æ) f. _wisdom, prudence, penetration_, Æ.

glêawscipe m. _wisdom, thoughtfulness, diligence_: _proof, indication_.

glêd (oe) f. _glowing coal, ember, fire, flame_, _Ps_; Æ. [glôwan;
'_gleed_']

+glêdan _to make hot, kindle_.

gleddian _to sprinkle, throw over_, #Lcd# 3·292^14.

glêdegesa m. _fiery terror_, B 2650.

gledene = glædene

glêdfæt n. _chafing-dish_, #Lcd# 123b.

gledine = glædene

glednes (#KGl#) = glædnes

glêdscofl (oe) f. _fire-shovel_, Cp 7#u#.

glêdstede ¶ m. _altar_.

glemm m? _blemish, spot_, W 67^8.

glencan = glengan

glendran _to devour, swallow_, MtR.

+glendrian _to precipitate_, LkL 4^29.

gleng mf. (nap. gleng(e)as, glenge, glenga) _ornament, honour_, CP:
_building_, NG.

±glengan (æ) _to adorn, decorate_, ÆL: _trim (lamp)_: (+) _set in order,
compose_.

glenge = gleng

+glengendlic _magnificent, brilliant_. adv. -lîce, OEG 1202.

glengful _decked out, adorned_, GPH 395.

glenglic = glengendlic

glentrian = glendran

glêo == glîw

glêof (v. late) = glêow II.

gleomu f. _splendour_, #Ruin# 34?

glêow I. = glîw. II. pret. 3 sg. of glôwan.

glêow- = glêaw-, glîw-

glêsan _to gloss_, #ÆGr# 293^13. [_L._ glossa]

glêsing f. _glossing, explanation, translation_, #ÆGr# 293^14.

glêw = glêaw

glîa (OEG 3173) = glîga gp. of glîg.

glida (io) m. _kite, vulture_, _Æ, Cp_. ['_glede_']

±glîdan^1 _to 'glide,' slip, slide_, _An, B_; Æ, AO, CP: _glide away,
vanish_.

glidder _slippery_, _VHy_. ['_glidder_']

gliddrian _to slip, be unstable_, OEG 4104.

glider (_W_ 239^14) = glidder

gliderung (y) f. _phantom_, WW 401^40.

glîg == glîw

glind m. _hedge, fence_, BC 1·296.

glioda (Cp) = glida

glîsian _to glitter_, _WW_. ['_glise_']

glisnian (y) _to 'glisten,' gleam, glitter_, _Shr, Run_.

glît pres. 3 sg. of glîdan.

glitenian _to glitter, shine_.

glitenung f. _coruscation, gleam_.

glitin- = gliten-

glîw (êo, îg, îo, îu, êow) n. _'glee,' pleasure, mirth, play, sport_,
_Ph_: _music_, _Gn_.

glîwbeam (îg) m. _musical instrument, harp, timbrel_, #LRSPs# 149^3.

glîwbydenestre (ý) f. _female musician_, #LPs# 67^26.

glîwcræft m. _music, minstrelsy_.

glîwcum '_tibiis_,' #LPs# 146^10 (ý).

glîwdrêam (êo) m. _music, mirth_, B 3021.

glîwere m. _buffoon, parasite_, OEG.

glîwgamen (îg) n. _revelry_, W 46^16.

glîwgeorn (îg) _fond of sport_.

glîwhlêoðriendlic _musical_, WW 446^36.

glîwian _to make merry, jest, play (music)_, _sing_, _BH_ (êo), _LL_:
_adorn_, #Rd# 27^13. ['_glew_']

glîwiend m. _performer, player_, #SPs# 67^26.

glîwingman (OEG 50^9) ?= glîwman

glîwlic _mimic, comic_, GPH 396.

glîwm¯æden (îe) n. _female musician_, #ERPs# 67^26.

glîwman m. _'gleeman,' minstrel, player, jester_, _B_ (êo); CP, WW (îg).

glîwre = glîwere

glîwstæf m. _melody, joy_, #Wa# 52.

glîwstôl m. _seat of joy_, #Rd# 88^8.

glîwung f. _boisterous laughter_, OEG 1472.

glîwword (êow) n. _song, poem_, #Met# 7^2.

glôf, glôfe f. '_glove_,' _B, Guth_. foxes g. _foxglove_.

+glôfed _gloved_, AS 42^11.

glôfung f. _supplying with gloves_, LL 450[10].

glôfwyrt f. _glovewort, dog's tongue, lily of the valley_, #Lcd#.

glôm m? _gloaming, twilight_, #Creat# 71.

glômung f. _'gloaming,' twilight_, _DHy_; GD.

glôwan^7 _to 'glow,'_ _Æ, OEG_.

glôwende _'glowing,' burning_, _Lcd_ 80b.

gly- = gli-

gnâd pret. 3 sg. of gnîdan.

gnægen = gnagen pp. of gnagan.

gnæt m. _'gnat,' midge_, _AO, Lcd, Mt_.

gnagan^6 _to 'gnaw,'_ _Æ, Ct, DD_.

-gnâst v. fýr-g.

gnêað _niggardly_, _B, BH_: _frugal_. [v. '_gnede_']

gnêaðlicnes f. _frugality_, OEG 2437.

gnêðe _scanty, sparing_, _WW_. adv. -lîce, GD. [v. '_gnethe_']

gnêðelicnes = gnêaðlicnes

gnêðen _moderate, modest_.

gnêðnes f. _frugality_: _scarcity_.

gnîdan^1 _to rub, grind together, crumble_, _Lk_; Æ, AO. ['_gnide_']

gnidil m? _rubber, pestle_, Cp 440#p#.

gnît pres. 3 sg. of gnîdan.

gnôgon pret. pl. of gnagan.

gnorn ¶ I. _sad, sorrowful, troubled, depressed_. II. m. _sadness,
sorrow, trouble_.

gnornan = gnornian

gnorncearig _sad, troubled_, #Jul# 529.

gnorngan = gnornian

gnornhof ¶ n. _prison, cell_.

gnornian _to be sad, murmur, complain, mourn, lament, grieve_, CP.

gnornscendende _hastening away in sadness_, #PPs# 89^10. [scyndan]

gnornsorg ¶ f. _sadness, sorrow_.

gnornung (e) f. _sadness, sorrow, lamentation_, Æ, AO, CP.

gnornword § n. _sad speech, lamentation_.

gnuddian _to rub_, OEG 56^33.

gnyran = gnyrran

gnyrn ¶ f. _sadness, mourning, calamity_: _wrong, insult, fault,
blemish_. [gnorn]

gnyrnwracu f. _revenge, enmity_, #El# 359.

gnyrran _to grind the teeth_, W 138^29: _creak_, #Lcd#.

+gnysan = cnyssan

gnýðe = gnêað

gôað 3 p. sg. pres. of gôian.

gôc = gêoc

God m. np. -as, -u _a 'god,' image of a god_, _Æ, Jul, LL, Ps_; AO:
_God, the (Christian) Deity_, _Æ, BH_; CP.

gôd I. comp. bet(e)ra, bettra, superl. bet(e)st _'good' (of persons or
things), virtuous_, _B, Bl, Chr, G_: _desirable, favourable, salutary,
pleasant_, _Bl_: _valid, efficient, suitable_, _Az, Jul, Lcd_:
_considerable, sufficiently great_, _Chr_. II. n. _good thing,
advantage, benefit, gift_, _B, Bl, Mt_; Æ, AO, CP: _'good,' goodness,
welfare_, CP: _ability, doughtiness_: _goods, property, wealth_, CP.

godæppel m. _quince_, WW 364^16. [= coddæppel]

godbearn n. _divine child_, _Son of God_: _godchild_, _W_.
['_godbairn_']

godborg m? _solemn pledge_ (_given in church_?), LL 18[33]; 66[33] and
v. 2·332, 1_d_.

godbôt f. _atonement_, LL 258[51].

godcund _religious, sacred, divine, heaven-sent_, _Gen, Chr_; Æ, CP.
['_godcund_']

godcundlic _divine_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce _divinely_, Æ: _canonically_.

godcundmæht n? _divine majesty_, MtL.

godcundnes f. _divine nature, divinity, Godhead_, _Æ, Lcd_: _divine
service_. ['_godcundness_']

gôdd¯æd f. _good work_, _Cr_: _benefit_, _PPs_.

goddohtor f. '_goddaughter_,' _Ct_.

gôddônd ¶ m. (nap. gôddênd) _doer of good, benefactor_.

goddrêam ¶ m. _joy of heaven_.

gode- = god-

godfæder m. _God the Father_: '_godfather_,' _Ct, LL_.

godfrecnes (BH 70^12) = godwrecnes

gôdfremmend m. _doer of good_? B 299.

godfyrht (e, i) _godfearing, pious_, _An_. ['_godfright_']

godgeld = godgield

godgespr¯æce (BH) = godspr¯æce

godgield (e^2, i^2, y^2) n. _heathen god, idol_, AO.

godgildlic _of idols_, WW 466^16.

godgim m. _heavenly jewel_? #El# 1114.

godhâd m. _divine nature_, CP 261^17.

gôdian _to improve, get better_, _Chr, Lcd_: _make better_: (±) _endow,
enrich_, _KC_; Æ. ['_good_']

goding m. _Son of God_, LkR 4^1.

gôdlâr f. _good teaching_, LL 304#b#.

gôdlêas _bad, evil_, _BH_. ['_goodless_']

gôdlic _'goodly,' excellent_, _Gen_: _comely, fair_, GPH 394.

godmægen n. _divine power, divinity_.

godmôdor f. '_godmother_,' _Shr_.

gôdnes f. _virtue_, _Bo_: _goodwill, beneficence, kindliness_, _Bo, Æ_.
['_goodness_']

gods¯æd n. _(God's seed), piety_, #Da# 90.

gôdscipe m. _kindness_, _DR_. ['_goodship_']

godscyld f. _sin against God, impiety_, #Jul# 204.

godscyldig _impious_, #Gu# 834.

godsibb m. _sponsor_, _W_. ['_gossip_']

godsibbr¯æden f. _sponsorial obligations_, W 228^3.

gôdspêdig ¶ _rich, happy_.

godspel n. _glad tidings_, _Mt_: _one of the four gospels_, _An_; Æ, CP:
_the 'gospel' (for the day)_, _Mt_.

godspelbodung f. _gospel-preaching, new dispensation_, ÆL 25^682.

godspellbôc f. _book containing the four gospels_, _LL_.
['_gospel-book_']

godspellere m. _'gospeller,' evangelist_, _Bl_; Æ, CP.

godspellian _to preach the gospel, evangelize_, _Ps_; Æ, CP.
['_gospel_']

godspell-ic (Æ), -isc _evangelical_.

godspelltraht m. _gospel commentary_.

godspr¯æce (ê) n. _oracle_, BH.

godsunu m. '_godson_,' _BH, Chr_.

godðrymm m. _divine majesty_.

godðrymnes f. _divine glory_, AS 9^4?

godwebb n. _fine cloth, purple_, CP.

godwebbcyn? (gode-) n. _purple (cloth)_.

godwebben _purple_, #Bl# 95^19; GD 346^22.

godwebgyrla m. _cloth of purple_, W 197^1.

godwebwyrhta m. _weaver of purple_.

gôdwillende _well-pleased_, EHy 16^6.

godwræc (e^2) _wicked_, #Bl#.

godwræclic _impious_, GD 232^13.

godwrecnes f. _wickedness, impiety_, BH 70^12#b#.

gofol = gafol

gôian _to lament_, NC 346; JAW 27.

gôl pret. 3 sg. of galan.

gold n. '_gold_,' _Æ, OET_; CP.

gold¯æht f. _wealth in gold_, B 2748.

goldbeorht ¶ _bright with gold_.

goldblêoh n. _golden hue_, WW 140^24.

goldblôma m. _golden bloom_? W 251^11; #Bl# 105^18.

goldburg ¶ f. _city in which gold is given_? _rich city_?

golde f. _'solsequia,' heliotrope_? _marigold_? _WW_ 301^6. ['_gold_']

golde- = gold-

golden pp. of gieldan.

goldfæt ¶ n. _golden vessel_.

goldf¯æted _plated or adorned with gold_, LL 460[10#h#].

goldfâg _variegated with gold, shining with gold_.

goldfell n. _gold plate_, WW 358^15. [?= *goldðell]

goldfinc m. '_goldfinch_,' _WW_.

goldfinger m. _ring-finger_.

goldfrætwe fp. _gold ornaments_.

goldfyld _covered with gold_, WW 518^4. [gold, fealdan]

goldgearwe fp. _gold ornaments_, NC 298.

goldgeweben _woven with gold_, OEG 4297.

goldgeweorc n. _golden object_, MH 222.

goldgiefa ¶ (i, y) m. _gold-giver, prince, lord_.

goldhilted _golden hilted_, #Rd# 56^14.

goldhladen _adorned with gold_, #Fin# 13.

goldhoma m. _gold-adorned coat of mail_, #El# 992.

goldhord nm. _treasure of gold, treasury_, _El, VPs_; Æ, AO.

goldhordhûs n. _privy_, WW 184^14.

goldhordian _to collect treasure, hoard_, #Sc# 173^12.

goldhroden ¶ _ornamented with gold_. [hrêodan]

goldhwæt _greedy for gold_, B 3074?

goldlæfer f. _gold plate_, #HGl# 431.

goldlêaf n. _gold leaf or plate_, W 263^6. [= læfer]
  [[error for "l¯æfer"?]]

goldmæstling (e) n. _brass_, WW. [cp. _Ger._ messing]

goldmâðm m. _treasure_, B 2414.

goldmestling = goldmæstling

goldôra m. _gold ore_, OEG 1810.

goldsele ¶ m. _hall in which gold is distributed_.

goldsmið m. '_goldsmith_,' _Æ_.

goldsmiðu f. _goldsmith's art_, #Wy# 73.

goldspêdig _rich in gold_, #Jul# 39.

goldtorht _bright like gold_, #Creat# 78.

goldðêof m. _stealer of gold_, LL 54[9,2].

goldðr¯æd m. _gold thread_, WW 196^15.

goldweard m. _keeper of gold (dragon)_, B 3081.

goldwecg m. _a lump of gold_, OEG 451.

goldwine ¶ m. _liberal prince, lord, king_.

goldwlanc ¶ _brave with gold, richly adorned_.

goldwlencu f. _gold ornament_, #Bl# 195.

goldwyrt f. _heliotrope_, OEG 26^36.

golfetung (#LPs# 78^4) = gaffetung

gôlon pret. pl. of galan.

golpen pp. of gielpan.

gom- = gam-

gôma m. (sg. or pl. used indifferently) _inside of mouth or throat,
palate, jaws_, _Lcd, Rd, VPs_; Æ. ['_gum_']

gombe ¶ f. _tribute_.

gomor _Hebrew measure, omer_, _Æ_. ['_gomer_']

gon- = gan-

gond- = gand-, geond-

gôp m. _slave, servant_, #Rd# 50^3. [or ?= gêap]

gor n. _dung, dirt, filth_, _Æ, Cp, Rd_. ['_gore_']

gorettan _to gaze, stare about_, OEG 5^3: _pour forth, emit_, GPH 398.

gorettung f. _gazing_, OEG 5^3n.

gorian _to gaze, stare about_, OEG 7^8.

gors (_Cp_), gorst m. _'gorse,' furze_, _MH, MtR_: _juniper_, _Lcd_.

gorstbêam m. _furze bush_, Mk 12^26.

gôs f. nap. gês '_goose_,' _LL, Rd, WW_; Æ.

gôs-fugol m. nap. -fuglas _goose_, Ct.

gôshafoc (u^3) m. '_goshawk_,' _WW_.

gost = gorst  [[under "gors"]]

gôst = gâst

Gota sg. -an pl. '_Goth_,' _BH_.

goten pp. of gêotan.

-gotennes v. tô-g.

gotwoðe f. _goatweed_, #Lcd#.

gôung f. _groaning_, BH 76^15. [gôian]

grâd m. (Æ), grâde f. _step, grade, degree, rank_. [_L._ gradus]

gr¯æd m. _grass_.

gr¯æda = grêada

gr¯ædan I. _to cry, call out_, _Lcd_: _to crow (cock)_, _CP_. ['_grede_']
II. ds. of wk. adj. _grassy_, ÆL 18^245.

gr¯æde = gr¯æd

gr¯æde-, gr¯ædi- = gr¯ædig-

gr¯ædig (ê) _'greedy,' hungry, covetous_, _Æ, B, Bl, Sol_; CP. adv. -lîce
_greedily, covetously, eagerly_.

gr¯ædignes f. _greediness, avarice_, Æ.

gr¯ædum adv. _greedily_, #Gu# 710.

græf I. (a) n. _cave_, _'grave,' trench_, _Seaf_; Mdf. [grafan] II. n?
_style for writing_, WW. [_L._ graphium]

gr¯æfa? græfe? _bush, bramble, grove, thicket_, _WW_; Mdf: _brush-wood
(for burning)_, _fuel_, _Chr_. ['_greave_']

græfen pp. of grafan.

græfere m. _'sculptor,' graver_, WW 164^14.

græfhûs n. _grave_, #Sat# 708.

græfsex n. _graving tool_, WW. [seax]

græft mfn. _graven image, carved object, sculpture_, Æ.

græftgeweorc n. _graven image_.

græfð pres. 3 sg. of grafan.

gr¯æg '_grey_,' _Æ, Ep, Gen, Met, WW_.

gr¯æggôs f. _grey (wild) goose_, #Gl#.

gr¯ægh¯æwe _grey_, WW 402^40.

gr¯æghama _grey-coated_ (_of spear_? _or wolf_?), #Fin# 6.

gr¯ægm¯æl _grey-coloured_, B 2682.

gr¯ægôs = gr¯æggôs

græm- = grem-

græn- = gren-

gr¯æp = grêp

+græppian _to seize_, MtL 14^31.

græs n. (nap. grasu) '_grass_,' _An, Cp, CP_.

græsgrêne '_grass-green_,' _Ep_ (e^1, oe^2).

græshoppa m. _grass-hopper, locust_.

græsmolde f. _greensward_, B 1881.

græswang ¶ m. _greensward_.

gr¯æt I. = pres. 3 sg. of (1) gr¯ædan, (2) grêtan. II. = grêat

gr¯ætan = grêtan

graf == græf

grâf nm. '_grove_,' _BC_; Mdf.

-grâfa v. ellen-g.

grafan^6 _to dig, dig up_, _Met, Rd, Rim_: _'grave,' engrave, carve,
chisel_, _PPs_.

grafet n. _trench_, EC 354; 355.

gram (o) adj. _angry, cruel, fierce_, AO: _oppressive, hostile_:
(as sb.) _enemy_. ['_grame_']

grama m. _rage, anger_, _Æ_: _trouble_, _Lcd_. ['_grame_']

gramatisccræft = grammaticcræft

gramb¯ære _passionate_, CP 289^5.

grame adv. _angrily, fiercely, cruelly_.

gramf¯ærnes f. _wrath_, LL (= *grambærnes).

gramhegdig = gramhýdig

gramheort ¶ _hostile-minded_.

gramhycgende _hostile_, #PPs# 68^25.

gramhýdig ¶ _hostile, malignant_.

gramian _to anger, enrage_, W 199^2. gramigende _raging_, GPH 402.

gramlic _wrathful, fierce, cruel, severe_, _Æ_. adv. -lîce, _Ps_.
['_gramely_']

grammaticcræft m. _art of grammar_, BH 258^15.

grammaticere m. _grammarian_, A 8·327.

grammôd _cruel_, #Bl# 223^33.

gramword n. _evil speech_, #PPs# 74^5.

grand pret. 3 sg. of grindan.

grandorlêas (o) _guileless_, #Jul# 271.

grânian^2 _to 'groan,' lament_, _Bl, Ps_.

granu f. _moustache_, Cp 335#m#. [_Ger._ granne]

grânung f. _'groaning,' lamentation_, _Æ_.

grâp I. f. _grasp, grip_. [grîpan] II. pret. 3 sg. of grîpan.

±grâpian _to feel for, lay hold of, seize, touch_, _Æ, B, Bl, Rd, VPs_.
['_grope_']

grâpigendlic _tangible_, ÆH 1·230.

grâpung f. _sense of feeling, touch_, _Æ_. ['_groping_']

grâscinnen _made of grey skins or grey fur_, #Chr# 1075#d#. [_ON._
grâskinn]

grasian _to 'graze,'_ _Lcd_.

grasu v. græs.

grâtan sbpl. _groats_, #Lcd# 3·292^24.

graðul _gradual, antiphon_.

grêada m. _lap, bosom_, _CP, Lk_. ['_greade_']

grêat (æ) comp. grîetra _'great,' tall, large, thick, massive_, _A, Æ,
Bo, Chr, WW_: _coarse_, _BC, Lcd_.

grêatewyrt f. _meadow saffron_, WW 298^7.

grêatian^2 _to become enlarged_, _CP_. ['_great_']

grêatnes (ê) f. '_greatness_,' _RB_ 88^15.

Grêcisc _Greek, Grecian_, Æ.

grêd == gr¯æd

grêf- = gr¯æf-

grêg- = gr¯æg

grem- = grim-

±gremian (_AO, Mk_), gremman _to enrage, provoke, irritate_, Æ, CP:
_revile_. ['_greme_']

gremung (æ) f. _provocation_, #LPs# 94^9.

grêne '_green_,' _Cp, Ct, Lcd_: _young, immature_, _Lcd_: _growing,
living_, LkL (oe): as sb., _Lcd_.

grênh¯æwen _green-coloured_, WW 379^24.

grênian _to become 'green,' flourish_, _Met_.

grênnes f. _greenness_, _BH_; CP: (in pl.) _green things, plants_,
A 8·310.

grennian _to 'grin,' gnash the teeth_, _Jul, Sc_; Æ.

grennung (æ) f. _grinning_, Cp 174#r#.

grêofa m. _pot, pan_, WW. [_Ger._ griebe]

grêop = grêp

grêosn (îo) _gravel, pebble_, #KGl# 76^3. [_Ger._ greiss]

grêot n. _'grit,' sand, earth_, _An, B, Gen_; Æ.

grêotan^2 _to cry, weep, lament_, _B, Sol_. [v. '_greet_']

grêothord n. _body_, #Gu# 1240.

grêow pret. 3 sg. of grôwan.

grêp, grêpe f. _land-drain, ditch, furrow_: _burrow_: _privy_, OEG (ý).

gres- = græs-

grêt- = grêat-

grêtan I. (±) _to 'greet,' salute, accost, speak to, challenge_, _Æ, B,
Mk, Jul_: (±) _to seek out, approach, visit_, _B_; W: _ill-treat,
attack_, _AO_: _touch, take hold of, handle, deal with_, _ÆGr_. hearpan
grêtan _play the harp_: _cohabit with_. II. ¶ (¯æ) _to weep, bemoan,
lament, deplore_, _Cr_. [v. '_greet_']

grêting f. _'greeting,' salutation_, _BH, LkL_ (oe): _present_.

grêtinghûs n. _audience chamber_, WW 184^3.

grêtingword n. _word of greeting_, #ÆGr# 209^14.

gretta = grytta

greðe '_sodalis_'? OEG 29^2.

grêwð pres. 3 sg. of grôwan.

griellan (i) _to irritate, provoke, offend_, _CP_: _gnash the teeth at,
creak_. ['_grill_']

grîetra v. grêat.

grîghund m. '_greyhound_,' _WW_ 276^3.

grillan = griellan

grim (CP) = grimm

grîma ¶ m. _mask, helmet_: _ghost_.

grimena _'bruchus', caterpillar_? #EPs# 104^34.

grimet- = grymet-

grimful _fierce, violent_, ES 39·348.

grîmhelm ¶ m. _helmet (with visor)_.

grîming _spectre_, WW 446^26.

grimlic _fierce, blood-thirsty, cruel, severe, terrible_, Æ, AO. adv.
-lîce. ['_grimly_']

grimm _fierce, savage_, _B, Bl_: _dire, severe, bitter, painful_, _BH_;
#Bl#. ['_grim_']

grimman^3 ¶ _to rage_: _hasten on_, B 306.

grimmân n. _terrible sin_, BH 50^8#b#.

grîmme _savagely, cruelly, severely_, _AO, Gen_. ['_grim_']

grimnes f. _ferocity, cruelty_, _Bl, Gu, WW_. ['_grimness_']

grimsian _to rage_, BH.

grimsung f. _harshness, severity_, CP 125^14.

grin _'ilium,' region of the groin_, LL.

±grîn (î, ý; also short?) nf. _snare, gin, trap_, _PPs, VPs_; Æ, CP:
_halter, noose_, _Mt_ (y). ['_grin_']

+grînan _to ensnare_.

+grind ¶ n. _impact, crash_.

±grindan^3 (y) _to rub together, grate, scrape_, _Rd_: _gnash_, _Ps_:
_'grind,' sharpen_, _Æ, Mt_.

grinde f. _shingle_, BC (v. Mdf).

grindel m. nap. grindlas _bar, bolt_. pl. _grating, hurdle_.

grindere m. _miller_, #Lcd# 3·178^1.

grindetôð m. _grinding tooth, molar_, WW 440^26.

gring == cring

grînian _to ensnare_, _KGl_. ['_grin_']

grint pres. 3 sg. of grindan.

grîosn = grêosn

gripa m. _handful, sheaf_.

±grîpan^1 intr. (w. d. g. or tô) _to seek to get hold of_, _B, Bl, Gen_:
tr. (w. g.) _seize, take, apprehend_, _Sol, WW_. ['_gripe_']

gripe m. _grasp, seizure, attack_, _B, WW_; Æ. gûðbilla g. _shield_:
_handful_, _Lcd, Ps_.

grîpend m. _seizer, robber_, WW 516^13.

+gripenes, gripnes f. _seizing, snare, captivity_, #EPs# 34^8.

gripu ¶ f. _kettle, caldron_.

grîpul '_capax_', WW 198^39. ['_gripple_']

-grîsan (ý) v. â-g.

grislic _'grisly,' horrible_, _HL_ 15^182 (very late).

grist n. _action of grinding_, _WW_: '_grist_.' [grindan]

gristbat- = gristbit-

gristbite m. _gnashing_, W 188^5.

gristbitian _to gnash the teeth_, _BH, Mk, WW_; Æ. ['_gristbite_']

gristbitung f. _gnashing of teeth_, _Bl, Mt_. ['_gristbiting_']

gristian _to gnash, grind_, #Gl#.

gristle f. '_gristle_', _Gl, WW_.

gristlung (y) f. _gnashing_.

gristra m. _baker_, WW.

gritta = grytta

grið n. _truce_, _(temporary) peace_, _Ma_: _protection of the person,
asylum, sanctuary, guarantee of safety_. ['_grith_']

griðbryce m. _breach of 'grið,'_ _LL_: _penalty for such a breach_,
_LL_. ['_grithbreach_']

±griðian _to make a truce or peace_, #Chr#: _protect_, LL.

griðlagu f. _law of temporary or local peace_, LL 470[9].

griðlêas _unprotected_, W 158^7.

groe- = grê-

grôf pret. 3 sg. of grafan.

grom = gram

gron- = gran-

grond pret. 3 sg. of grindan.

gronwisc '_acus_', Cp 160#a# (v. AB 9·35).

grôpian = grâpian

-groren v. be-g.

grorn ¶ I. m. _sorrow, sadness_. II. adj. _sad, agitated_. adv. -e.

grornhof n. _sad home, hell_, #Jul# 324.

grornian _to mourn, complain_.

grorntorn _sadness_, #Rim# 66?

grornung f. _complaint_, NG.

grot I. n. _particle_, _Bo_; AO. ['_grot_'] II. n. _groats, coarse
meal_, _Gl_. [grêot]

grotig _earthy_, GPH 396.

±grôwan^7 _to 'grow,' increase_, _Bo, Cp, Rd, WW_: _germinate_,
_KGl, Mk_.

grôwende '_growing_,' _Gen, KGl_.

grôwnes f. _growth_, BH.

grummon pret. pl. of grimman.

grund m. _'ground,' bottom_, _B, Gen, Sol, VPs_: _foundation_, _LkL_:
_abyss, hell_: _plain, country land, earth_, _An, B, Bl, Wid_: _sea,
water_.

grundbedd n. _ground, soil_, #Rd# 81^24.

grundbûend ¶ m. _earth-dweller_.

grunden pp. of grindan.

grundeswelge (i^3, u^3, v^3) f. '_groundsel_,' _Lcd_.

grundfûs _hastening to hell_, #Mod# 49.

grundhyrde m. _keeper of the abyss_, B 2136.

grundinga = grundlunga

grundlêas _bottomless, unfathomable_, _Bo_: _boundless, vast_.
['_groundless_']

grundlêaslic _boundless, vast_, CP 417^10.

grundling m. _groundling (fish)_, BC 3·525 (Mdf).

grundlunga (i^2) adv. _from the foundation, completely_, Æ: _to the
ground, prone, prostrate_, Æ.

grundon pret. pl. of grindan.

grundscêat ¶ m. _region_.

grundsele ¶ m. _abysmal dwelling_.

grundstân m. _foundation-stone_, _WW_. ['_groundstone_']

+grundstaðelian _to establish firmly_, ÆL 8^21.

grundwæg m. _earth_, #An# 582.

grundwang ¶ m. _(ground-plain), the earth_: _bottom (of a lake)_.

grundweall m. _foundation_, _Æ, Lk_. ['_groundwall_']

+grundweallian _to establish, found_, #EPs# 23^2.

grundwela m. _earthly riches_, #Gen# 957.

grundwyrgen f. _water-wolf_, B 1518.

grunian, grunnian (OEG) _to grunt_.

grunnettan _to 'grunt,'_ _Cp_.

grunung, grunnung f. _grunting, bellowing_, OEG.

grut m. _gulf, chasm, abyss_: _stone, rock_, OEG 1814.

grût f. (ds. grýt, grût) _groats, coarse meal_, _Cp, Ct, Lcd_: _grains,
the spent grain after brewing_, _Lcd_. ['_grout_']

grutt, grutte = grut

gryllan = griellan

grym == grim(m)

grymet-tan, -tian (i) _to grunt, roar, rage_.

grymet-ung, -tung f. _grunting, roaring, bellowing_.

grymm = grimm

grymman = gremman  [[under "gremian"]]

gryn = gyrn

grýn = grîn

+grynd n. _plot of ground_, TC 231^22.

gryndan I. _to set, sink (of the sun)_, _WW_. ['_grind_'; grund] II. =
grindan

grynde ¶ n. _abyss_.

grynel (WW 291^3) = cyrnel

grýnian = grînian

grynsmið m. _worker of ill_, #An# 919.

grýpe (OEG 4290; 4744) = grêpe  [[under "grêp"]]

gryre ¶ m. _horror, terror_: _fierceness, violence_, DD 8: _horrible
thing_.

gryrebrôga ¶ m. _terror, horror_.

gryrefæst _terribly firm_, #El# 76a.

gryrefâh ¶ adj. (used as sb.) _spotted horror_, B.

gryregæst (¯æ?) m. _terrible stranger_, B 2560.

gryregeatwe fp. _war-gear_, B 324.

gryrehwîl f. _terrible time_, #An# 468.

gryrelêoð ¶ n. _terrible song_.

gryrelic ¶ _terrible, horrible_.

gryremiht f. _terrible power_, W 195^20.

gryresîð m. _way of terror, dangerous expedition_, B 1462.

gryrran _to gnash_, DD 195.

grys- = gris-

grýs- = grîs-

grýt I. pres. 3 sg. of grêotan. II. v. grût.

grýto f. _greatness_, #Nar# 8^22. [grêat]

grytta, gryttan pl. _coarse meal, bran, chaff_, _Ep, Lcd, WW_.
['_grit_']

grytte f. _sand_, #Ps#.

grýttra (A 4·151) = *grietra cp. of grêat. ['_greater_']

gryð- = grið-

gû == gêo

guldon pret. pl. of gieldan.

gullon pret. pl. of giellan.

gulpon pret. pl. of gielpan.

guma ¶ m. _man, hero_, _B_. ['_gome_']

gumcynn ¶ sn. _human race, men, mankind, nation_.

gumcyst ¶ f. _excellence, bravery, virtue, liberality_. adv. -um
_excellently_.

gumdrêam m. _enjoyment of life_, B 2469.

gumdryhten m. _lord_, B 1642.

gumfêða m. _troop_, B 1401.

gumfrêa m. _king_, #Da# 651.

-gumian v. ofer-g.

gummann m. _man_, B 1028.

gumrîce ¶ n. _kingdom, earth_.

gumrinc ¶ m. _man, warrior_.

gumstôl m. _ruler's seat, throne_, B 1952.

gumðegen m. _man_, #Cra# 83.

gumðêod f. _folk, people_, #Gen# 226.

gund m. _matter, pus_, _Lcd_. ['_gound_']

gundeswilge (_Ep, Erf, Ln_) = grundeswelge

gung = geong

gung- = ging-

gungon pret. pl. of gangan.

gunnon (BH) pret. pl. of ginnan.

gupan '_clunibus, renibus, coxe_,' WW 205^41 (v. A 31·522).

gurron pret. pl. of gyrran.

guton pret. pl. of gêotan.

guttas mp. _'guts,' entrails_, _HGl_ 408.

gûð ¶ f. _combat, battle, war_.

gûðbeorn m. _fighting-hero_, B 314.

gûðbill ¶ n. _battle-bill, sword_.

gûðbord ¶ n. _war-shield_.

gûðbyrne ¶ f. _corslet, coat of mail_.

gûðcearu f. _war-trouble_, B 1258.

gûðcræft m. _war-craft_, B 127.

gûðcwên ¶ f. _warrior queen_.

gûðcyning ¶ m. _warrior king_.

gûðcyst f. _troop, warrior band_? (Kluge): _bravery_? (BT), #Ex# 343.

gûðdêað m. _death in battle_, B 2249.

gûðfana m. _gonfanon, war-banner, ensign, standard_, Æ, AO.

gûð-flâ? f., -flân? mf. _battle-arrow_, #Gen# 2063.

gûðfloga m. _winged fighter_, B 2528.

gûðfona = gûðfana

gûðfrêa m. _warlike prince_, #An# 1335.

gûðfrec ¶ _bold in battle_.

gûðfreca ¶ m. _warrior_.

gûðfremmend ¶ m. _warrior_.

gûðfugol m. _bird of war, eagle_, #Rd# 25^5.

gûðgeatwe ¶ fp. _armour_.

gûðgel¯æca m. _warrior_, #El# 43.

gûðgemôt ¶ n. _battle, combat_.

gûðgetâwe = gûðgeatwe

gûðgeðingu ¶ np. _battle, contest_.

gûðgew¯æde ¶ n. _war-dress, armour_.

gûðgeweorc ¶ n. _warlike deed_.

gûðgewinn ¶ n. _battle_.

gûðhafoc m. _war-hawk, eagle_, ¶#Chr# 937#a#.

gûðheard _bold in battle_, #El# 204.

gûðhelm m. _helmet_, B 2487.

gûðhere ¶ m. _warlike host, army_.

gûðhorn m. _war-horn, trumpet_, B 1432.

gûðhrêð m. _martial glory_, B 819.

gûðhwæt _fierce in battle_, #Ap# 57.

gûðlêoð n. _war-song_, B 1522.

gûð-mæcga, -maga m. _warrior_, #Sol# 90.

gûðmôd ¶ _warlike_.

Gûðmyrce pl. _Ethiopians_, #Ex# 69.

gûðplega ¶ m. _attach, battle_.

gûðr¯æs ¶ m. _battle-rush, onslaught_.

gûðrêaf n. _armour_, #Jul# 387.

gûðrêow _fierce in battle_, B 58. [hrêow]

gûðrinc ¶ m. _warrior, hero_.

gûðrôf ¶ _brave in battle_.

gûðscearu f. _slaughter in battle_, B 1213.

gûðsceaða m. _ravaging invader_, B 2318.

gûðsceorp n. _armour_, #Jud# 329.

gûðscrûd n. _armour_, #El# 258.

gûðsearo ¶ n. _armour_.

gûðsele m. _hall of warriors_, B 443.

gûðspell n. _tidings of a war_, #Gen# 2097.

gûðsweord n. _sword_, B 2154.

gûððracu ¶ f. _hostile attack_.

gûððrêat m. _warlike troop_, #Ex# 193.

gûðweard ¶ m. _war-lord, king_.

gûðweorc n. _warlike deed_, #An# 1068.

gûðwêrig _wounded_, B 1586.

gûðwiga ¶ m. _warrior_.

gûðwine ¶ m. _battle-friend, weapon_.

gûðwudu m. _spear_, #Fin# 6.

gy- = ge-

gyc- = gic-

gyd == gid(d)

gyden (AO), gydenu f. (occl. gs. gydenan) _goddess_. [god]

gydenlic '_vestalis_' (= _dealis_? A 31·63), WW 524^33.

gydig (i) _possessed (by a spirit)_, _insane_, OEG 5009. ['_giddy_']

gyf = gif

gyf- = geof-, gief-, gif-

gýf- = gîf-

gyhða (Æ) = gicða

gyhðu = gehðu

gyld = gield

gyld- = gild-

+gyld = gylden

±gyldan I. _to gild_. II. (AO) = gieldan

±gylden '_golden_,' _B, Dan_; Æ, AO, CP.

gyldenbêag (gilden-, Æ) m. _crown_.

gyldenfeax _golden-haired_, WW 348^35.

gyldenhîwe _golden-hued_, OEG 43^5.

gyldenmûða _golden-mouthed (Chrysostom)_, GD 94^24; ZDA 31^7.

gyldenwecg (gylding-) m. _gold mine_, WW 241^17.

gylian, gyllan _to yell, shout_. gyliende '_garrulus_,' OEG 56^138.

gylm = gelm

gylp == gielp

gylt (e, i, ie) m. _'guilt,' sin, offence, crime, fault_, _A, Bl, Chr,
Mt_; AO, CP.

±gyltan _to commit sin, be guilty_, _CP, Mt, RB, VPs_. ['_guilt_,'
'_guilting_']

gyltend m. _sinner, debtor_, CP.

gyltig _offending, 'guilty,'_ _Mt_.

gylting f. _sin_, DR.

gyltlic _sinful_, DR.

gyltwîte n. (gyld-) _fine for unpaid tax_, KC 514.

gylung? '_garrulitas_,' OEG 56^141.

gym = gimm

gym- = gim-

gým- = gîem-

gymian = gymmian

gymm = gimm

gymmian _to cut the throat, kill_, OEG 3799.

gyn- = geon-, gin-

gynde pret. of *giendan _to drive_.

-gýpe (= î?) v. ¯æ-g.  [[headword spelled "¯ægype"]]

gypigend _yawning_, GPH 398.

gypung f. _gaping, open mouth_, GPH.

gyr I. m. _mud, marsh_. II. _fir tree_, WW 269^14.

gyr- = geor-, gier-

gyra = gyr I.

±gyrdan (pret. gyrde), _to 'gird' (sword)_, _Gen, PPs_: _encircle,
surround_, _JnL_: (+) _invest with attributes_, _PPs_.

gyrdel (e) m. _'girdle,' belt, zone_, _Lcd, Mt_; Æ: _purse_.

gyrdelbred n. '_pugillar_,' WW 277^13.

gyrdelhring n. _girdle, buckle_, WW 432.

gyrdels, gyrder = gyrdel

gyrdil- = gyrdel-

gyrdweg m. _road with a fence on either side_ (BT), KC 3·412^21.

gyrdwîte n. _affliction caused by a rod (used of Moses' rod)_, #Ex# 15.

gýren = grîn

gyrman (#LPs# 37^8) = cirman

gyrn ¶ mn. _sorrow, misfortune_.

gyrnstafas mp. _injury, affliction_, #Jul# 245.

gyrnwracu ¶ f. _revenge for injury_.

gyrran^3 [= gierran, georran] _to sound, chatter_, Æ: _to creak, grate_,
#An# 374.

gyrretan _to roar (of lions)_, #LPs#.

gyrsandæg (MFH 97) = gierstandæg

gyrst = grist

gyrstandæg (Æ) = gierstandæg

gyrtrêow n. _fir tree_, WW 138^11.

gyru f. = gyr

gyrwan = gierwian  [[error for "gierwan"?]]

gyrwefenn n. _marsh_, #ÆGr# 60^10.

gýse = gêse

gýsel = gîsl

gyst = (1) gæst, (2) gist

gyst- = gæst-, giest-

gysternlicdæg = gierstandæg

gyt = git pron.

gýt I. pres. 3 sg. of gêotan. II. = gîet

gýt- = gîet-, gît-

gyte, gytt (NG) m. _pouring forth, shedding_, Æ: _flood_, Æ. [gêotan]

gytes¯æl m. (dp. gytesâlum) _joy at wine-pouring, carousal_, #Jud# 22.

gytestrêam m. _running stream_, WW.

gytfeorm f. _ploughing-feast_, LL 452, 21, 4.

gýðcorn (î) n. _spurge laurel_? #Lcd#.

gýðrife f. _cockle_, #Lcd#.

gýu = gêo




=H=


h is often wrongly prefixed to words, as in Cockney English.

hâ m. _oar-thole, rowlock_. æt hâ _for each oar, or each oarsman_, #Chr#
1040#c#. [_Icel._ hâr]

habban anv. ptc. pres. hæbbende; pres. 1 sg. hæbbe, 2. hæfst, 3. hæfð,
pl. hæbbað, habbað; pret. 3 sg. hæfde; subj. hæbbe; imperat. hafa; pp.
(±) hæf(e)d _to 'have,'_ _Bl, G_: _possess, own, hold_, _B, Bl, G_:
_keep, retain_, _Bl, VPs_: _entertain, cherish_: _esteem, consider_,
_BH_: _be subject to, experience_, _Mk_: _obtain_, _Chr, Mt_: _assert_,
_Lcd_: used as auxiliary to indicate past tense, _have_, _Æ, Chr, Ex_.
h. for _consider_: (+) _hold, keep from, preserve, retain_, CP, Æ. yfle
+h. _afflict, torment_.

haca m. _hook, door-fastening_, Cp 311#p#. [_Ger._ hake]

-haccian v. tô-h.

hacele (æ) f. _cloak, coat, vestment, cassock, 'pallium,'_ _AO, WW_; Æ.
['_hackle_']

hacod (æ, e) m. _pike_, _WW_. ['_haked_'; _Ger._ hecht]

hacole, hacule = hacele

hâd m. (rare gs. hâda) _person, individuality_, _Æ, BH, Mt_: _degree,
rank, order, office (especially holy office)_, _Æ, BH, CP_: _condition,
state, nature, character, form, manner_, _B, Sol_: _sex_, _BH, Chr_:
_race, family, tribe_: _choir_. ['_had_']

-hâd masc. suffix; usu. denotes state or condition, as cildhâd, mægðhâd.
[_Eng._ -hood]

+hada m. _brother monk_, LL.

hâdbôt f. _compensation for injury or insult to a priest_, _LL_.
['_hadbot_']

hâdbreca m. _violator of (holy) orders_, LL.

hâd-bryce, -brice m. _violation of (holy) orders_, LL.

hâdelîce adv. _as to persons_, DHy 29^6.

hâdesmann m. _member of a particular order_, #Chr# 995#f#.

hâdgrið n. _privilege (as regards peace) of holy orders_, LL 471[19].

±hâdian _to ordain, consecrate_, _BH_; Æ. ['_hade_']

hâdnotu f. _office of a priest_, LL 458#h#.

hâdor I. n. _clearness, brightness_, B 414 (or ? hador = heaðor). II. ¶
(¯æ) _bright, clear, fresh_: _distinct, loud_. [_Ger._ heiter] adv.
hâdre.

hâdsw¯æpa m. _bridesman_, WW 174^35.

hâdsw¯æpe (â) f. _bridesmaid_, WW.

hâdung f. _consecration, ordination_, _Chr, LL_. [v. '_hade_']. hâdunge
underfôn _to take the veil_.

hâdungdæg (i^2) m. _ordination day_, ÆL 33^59.

hæb = hæf

hæb- (#Gl#) = hæf-

hæbb- = habb-, hebb-

hæbbednes f. _continence_? A 8·320^3.

hæbbendlic '_habilis_,' #ÆGr# 54^5.

-hæbbere v. sulh-h.

hæc fm. _grating_, _'hatch,' half-gate_, _Ct_.

hæc- = hac-

+hæcca _sausage_, WW 411^20. [hacian]  [[headword spelled "haccian"]]

hæcce I. f. _crozier_. II. gs. of hæc.

hæcwer m. _hatch-weir, a weir in which fish were caught_, KC 3·450.

h¯ædor = hâdor

hædre ¶ _straitly, anxiously_.

h¯ædre = hâdre  [[form of "hâdor"]]

hæf I. ¶ n. (heaf-, haf- in obl. cases) _sea, ocean_. [cp. _Ger._ haff]
II. (OEG) = hæfe

h¯æfd = hêafod

hæfde pret. sg. of habban.

hæfe I. m. _leaven_. [_Ger._ hefe] II. = hefe

h¯æfed = hêafod

-hæfednes v. be-, for-h.

hæfegîtsung? f. _covetousness_, #EPs# 118^36.

hæfen I. f. _property, possessions_, Æ. [_Ger._ habe] II. f. _'haven,'
port_, _Chr_. III. = hefen. IV. pp. of hebban.

hæfen- = hafen-

hæfenbl¯æte = hæferbl¯æte

hæfene = hæfen II.

hæfer (e) m. _he-goat_.

hæferbîte m. _forceps_, WW 198^16.

hæferbl¯æte f? _a bird_? _bittern_? _sea-gull_? WW 116^41; 361^17.

hæfergât = hæfer

hæfern m. _crab_, WW.

hæfig = hefig

hæfne = hæfen

hæfreblête = hæferbl¯æte

hæfst v. habban.

hæft I. m. _bond, fetter_: _captive, slave, servant_: _bondage,
imprisonment, affliction_, Æ: (±) _seizing, thing seized_, #CLPs# 123^6.
[_Ger._ haft] II. n. _'haft,' handle_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ. [_Ger._ heft] III.
pp. of hæftan.

±hæftan _to bind, fetter_: _arrest, detain, imprison_: _condemn_, DR
197^13. [_Ger._ heften]

hæfte = hæft II.

hæfteclomm m. _fetter_, ¶#Chr# 942#a#.

+hæftednes f. _captivity_.

hæftedôm m. _slavery, captivity_, #Met# 25^65.

hæften f. _confinement_, #Chr# 1095.

+hæftend m. _prisoner_, MFH 136.

hæftenêod = hæftnîed

hæftincel (e^2) n. _slave_, WW.

hæfting f. _fastening, lock_.

hæftlic _captious_, OEG.

hæftling m. _prisoner, captive_, Æ.

hæftmêce m. _hilted sword_, B 1457.

±hæftnes (v. MF 165) = hæftednes

hæftneð = hæftnoð

±hæftnian _to take prisoner_: _seize, detain_.

hæftnîed (AO), (ê, ý; Æ) f. _custody, imprisonment, bondage_.

+hæftnîedan _to take captive_, GD 135^15.

hæftnîedling (ê^2, y^2) m. _captive_, ÆL.

hæftnîednes (ý) f. _captivity_, NC 299, GD 346^22.

hæftnoð m. _confinement, imprisonment_.

hæftnung f. _confinement, captivity_.

hæftnýd (Æ) == hæftnîed

hæftung f. _fetter_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

hæfð pres. 3 sg. of habban.

hæfuc = hafoc

hæg- = hago-, hagu-, hege-

+h¯ægan? _to vex, harass_? #Ex# 169 (GK). [_ON._ hâ]

+hæge n. _enclosure, meadow_, OEG; Mdf.

hæghâl _safe and sound_, DR.

hæg-tes, -tis, -tesse f. _witch, pythoness_.

hægðorn (Æ) = haguðorn

hægweard m. _keeper of cattle in a common field_, LL 452[20].

h¯æh- = hêah-

hæhtis = hægtes

hæl n. _omen_, B 204.

h¯æl I. = h¯ælu. II. adj. = hâl

hæl- = hel-

h¯æl- = hâl-, hêl-

h¯ælan I. (±) _to 'heal,' cure, save_, _CP, Lcd, Mt, Ps_; Æ (+): _greet,
salute_, GD 36^27. +h¯æl! _Hosanna!_ [hâl] II. _to castrate_,
#Lcd# 3·186^22.

+hæld = +hield

hæle ¶ m. _man, hero_.

h¯æle = h¯ælu

+h¯æled = hâl

+h¯ælednes f. _healing_, GD 247^11.

h¯ælend (ê) m. _Saviour, Christ_. ['_healend_'; _Ger._ heiland]

h¯ælendlic _wholesome_, OEG 153^8.

h¯ælet- = hâlet-

hæleð ¶ m. (nap. hæleðas, hæleð) _man, hero, fighter_, _B_. ['_heleth_';
_Ger._ held]

hæleðhelm = heoloðhelm

hælfter n. '_halter_,' _WW_.

h¯ælgere m. _sanctifier_, DR(a^2).

hælhiht _full of corners_. [healh I.]

h¯ælig _unstable, inconstant_, #Bo# 115^3.

h¯æling f. '_healing_,' _Nic_.

hælm = healm

h¯ælnes f. _salvation, safety_, _CP_: _sanctuary_. ['_healness_']

h¯ælnesgrið n. _peace-privileges attaching to a sanctuary_, LL 471[19].

h¯ælotîd f. _prosperous time_, #Chr# 1065#d#.

h¯ælsent (Cp 484#e#) = h¯ælsiend

h¯ælsere m. _soothsayer, augur_, Cp 953#a#.

±h¯ælsian _to exercise augury, take omens, foretell, prophesy_, #Gl#.
[h¯æl]

h¯æls-iend, -igend (â) m. _soothsayer, augur_.

h¯ælsung I. f. _augury, divination_. II. = hâlsung I.

h¯ælð, h¯ælðo f. '_health_,' _Æ_: _salvation_, _Lcd_; Æ: _healing_, _Æ_.

h¯ælu f. _health, prosperity, safety, salvation_, Æ, CP.

h¯ælubearn ¶ n. _Saviour, Christ_.

h¯ælwyrt f. _'pulegium,' pennyroyal_, WW 300^24.

h¯ælynd = h¯ælend

h¯æmæht (MkR 1^22) = hêahmiht

h¯æman _to have intercourse with, cohabit with_, Æ, CP: _marry_, MtR.

h¯æmed (ê) n. (nap. h¯æmedru) _cohabitation_, Æ, CP: _marriage_.

h¯æmedceorl m. _married man_, LL.

h¯æmedgemâna m. _matrimony_, WW 441^24.

h¯æmedlâc n. _coition_, #Rd# 43^3.

h¯æmedrim m. '_lenocinium_,' OEG 5046.

h¯æmedru v. h¯æmed.

h¯æmedscipe m. _cohabitation, wedlock_, OEG.

h¯æmedðing n. _coition, cohabitation_, ÆL: _marriage_.

h¯æmedwîf n. _married woman_.

h¯æmere m. _consort, bedfellow_, Æ.

h¯æmet, h¯æmeð = h¯æmed

hæn == henn

h¯ænan I. _to stone_, _Jn_; Æ. ['_hene_'] II. = hîenan

hænep (e) m. '_hemp_,' _Lcd, WW_. [_Ger._ hanf]

hænfugel = hennfugol

hænn == henn

h¯ænðu = hîenðo

+hæp, hæplic _fit, convenient_.

+hæplicnes f. _convenience_.

hæpse f. _'hasp,' fastening_, Æ.

hæpsian _to 'hasp,' fasten_, Æ.

hæpte (pret. 3 sg.) _jumped_, ÆL 31^477.

h¯ær (â, ê) n. '_hair_,' _Lcd_; Æ: _a hair_, _Æ, Cp_ (ê), _Mk_.

hær- = har-, hear-, her(e)-

h¯ær- = hêr-

h¯ære f. _sackcloth of hair_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_haire_']

+h¯ære, +h¯ærede _hairy_.

h¯æren _of hair_, _Bl, Lcd_. ['_hairen_']

h¯ærenfagol sb. _hedgehog_, #SPs# 103^19 (cp. hatte-f.).

hærfest (e) m. _autumn, 'harvest'-time_, _A, Ct_; AO: _August_,
A 10·185. h. handful _handful of corn (a due belonging to the husbandman
on an estate)_, LL 450. [_Ger._ herbst]

hærfestlic _autumnal_, Æ.

hærfestmonað m. '_harvest-month_,' _September_, _ÆGr_ 43^8.

hærfest-tîd f., -tîma m. _autumn, harvest-time_.

hærfestw¯æta m. _autumn rain_, AO 102^7.

h¯ærgripa (ê; v. late) m. _seizing by the hair_, LL 611.

h¯æriht _hairy_, WW 513^8.

h¯æring m. '_herring_,' _Gl_ (ê), _WW_; Æ.

h¯æringtîma m. _herring season_, Ct.

h¯ærloccas mp. _locks of hair_, _HGl_. ['_hairlock_']

hærn f. _wave, tide_: (¶) _sea, ocean_.

h¯ærn¯ædl f. _curling-pin_, OEG 1200.

hærnflota m. _ship_, #Gu# 1307.

hærsceard n. _hare-lip_, #Lcd#. [_Ger._ hasenscharte]

h¯ærsyfe (ê) n. '_hair-sieve_,' _A_ 9·264.

h¯æs f. _'hest,' bidding, behest, command_, _Æ, Gen_. [hâtan]

hæsel m. _'hazel' shrub_, _Gl, Lcd_; Æ; Mdf.

hæselhnutu f. '_hazel-nut_,' _Gl, WW_ (a).

h¯æsere m. _master, lord_, LkLR.

hæsl = hæsel

hæslen _of hazel_, _Lcd_. ['_hazelen_']

hæsp = hæpse

hæssuc = hassuc

h¯æst ¶ I. _violent, vehement_. adv. hæst-e, -lîce. II. f. _violence,
strife_.

h¯æswalwe (WW 7^28) = *s¯æswealwe

hæt m. '_hat_,' _Cp, AO_; Æ.

h¯æt pres. 3 sg. of hâtan.

±h¯ætan (â) tr. _to 'heat,'_ _Shr, Lcd_: intr. _become hot_, _Gl_.

h¯ætcole = h¯æðcole

h¯æte f. _heat_, Æ, AO. [hât]

hæteru np. _garments_, _ÆH_. ['_hater_']

h¯æto = h¯ætu

h¯æts (ÆL 18^350) = hægtes

h¯ætst pres. 2 sg. of hâtan.

hætt = hæt

h¯ætte = hâtte, v. hâtan.

hættende _attacking_. [hatian]

hættian (e) _to scalp_, LL 334, 30, 5.

h¯ætu (o^2, e^2) f. _'heat,' warmth_, _Bl, Mt, VPs_; Æ: _fervour,
ardour_, _VHy_.

h¯æð I. mn. _'heath,' untilled land, waste_, _Ex_; Mdf: _heather_, _Gl,
Lcd_. II. = hæða  [[II. error for "h¯æða"?]]

h¯æða m. _hot weather_.

h¯æðberie f. _whortleberry_, #Lcd#.

h¯æðcole f. _name of a plant_, WW.

h¯æðen I. (ê) _'heathen,' heathenish, pagan_, _Æ, Bl_; AO, CP. II. m.
_gentile, heathen man (especially of the Danes)_, _Æ, Mk_.

h¯æðena m. _heathen_, LkR 21^25.

h¯æðencyning m. _heathen king_, #Da# 54.

h¯æðencynn n. _heathen race_, #Gen# 2546.

h¯æðendôm m. _'heathendom,' false religion_, _LL_.

h¯æðenfeoh n. _heathen sacrifice_? #Jul# 53.

h¯æðenfolc n. _heathen people_, W 223^12.

h¯æðengield (i^3, y^3) n. _idolatry_: _idol_.

h¯æðengilda (y^3) m. _idolater_, Æ.

h¯æðenhere m. _Danish army_, #Chr#.

h¯æðenisc _'heathenish,' pagan_, _AO_.

h¯æðennes f. _heathenism, paganism_, _BH_. ['_heathenesse_']

h¯æðenscipe m. _paganism, idolatry_, _Æ, Chr_ (ê). ['_heathenship_']

h¯æðenstyrc m. _heathen calf (the golden calf of the Israelites)_,
#PPs# 105^17.

h¯æðfeld m. _heath-land_, #Bo# 34^27.

h¯æðiht _heathy_, KC.

h¯æðin- = h¯æðen-

h¯æðstapa ¶ m. _heath-stalker, wolf, stag_. [stæppan]
  [[under "steppan"]]

h¯æðung f. _heating_, ÆH 1·286. [*h¯ætung]

h¯æwen (ê) _blue, purple, azure_.

h¯æwengrêne _cerulean_, WW 379^23.

h¯æwenhydele f. _a plant_, #Lcd#.

hafa, imperat. of habban; hafast, hafað = hæfst, hæfð pres. 2 and 3 sg.
of habban.

-hafa v. wan-h.

hafala = hafela

hafastu = hafast ðu  [[form of "habban"]]

hafecere m. '_hawker_,' _LL_.

hafela ¶ (ea) m. _head_.

hafelêst = hafenlêast

hafen pp. of hebban.

hafenian ¶ _to hold, grasp_. [hebban]

hafenlêas _destitute, needy, poor_, _Æ, WW_. ['_haveless_'; hæfen]

hafenlêast f. _want, poverty_, Æ.

hâfern = h¯æfern  [[headword spelled "hæfern"]]

hafetian (i^2) _to clap, flap_, Æ.

hafoc (ea) m. '_hawk_,' _OET, Wyrd_.

hafoccynn n. _hawk-tribe_, Æ.

hafocere m. _hawker_, WW 235^9.

hafocfugel m. _hawk_, LL (162^19).

hafocwyrt f. _a plant_, #Lcd#.

hafola = hafela

-hafol(nes) v. wan-h.

hafuc = hafoc

hafudland (WW 147^18) = heafodland  [[headword spelled "hêafodlond"]]

haga I. m. _hedge, enclosure, curtilage_, _WW_; Mdf: _fortified
enclosure_, _B_: _homestead, house_, _Ct_. ['_haw_'] II. m. '_haw_,'
_WW_ 204^20: _trifle_, _WW_ 138^39; 269^5.

hagal == hagol

hagaðorn = haguðorn

hage- = hago-

+hagian (impers.) _to please, suit_. gif him (hine) tô ð¯æm +hagige _if
he can afford it_.

hago- v. also hæg-.

hagol (æ^1, e^1, a^2, e^2) m. '_hail_,' _Æ, Gen, Met, Ph_: _hail
shower_, _Bo_: _name of the rune for =h=_.

hagolfaru (hægl-) f. _hailstorm_, #Wa# 105.

hagolian _to 'hail,'_ _AO_ (-gal-).

hagolscûr m. _hail-shower_.

hagolstân m. '_hailstone_,' _Æ_.

hagorûn (ea) f. _spell_, #Nar# 50^14.

hagospind (ea) n. _cheek_. [haga]

hagosteald I. (hæg-, heh-) _unmarried, independent_. II. m. _unmarried
man attached to a court, bachelor, young man, warrior, liege man_.
[_Ger._ hagestolz] III. n. _celibacy_, #Rd# 21^31. IV. (heh-) _virgin_,
LL, NG.

hagostealdhad (hæg-) m. _unmarried state_.

hagostealdlic (heh-) _virgin_, DR 66^1.

hagostealdmonn m. _bachelor, warrior_.

hagostealdnes (heh-) f. _virginity_, N.

hagu- = hago-

haguðorn (æ^1) m. '_hawthorn_,' _Gl, Mt, Lcd_.

ha ha interj. '_ha! ha!_' _ÆGr_.

hal = heal

hal- = heal(h)-

hâl- = h¯æl-

±hâl _'hale_,' '_whole,' entire, uninjured, healthy, well, sound, safe,
genuine, straightforward_, _Lcd, Mt_; Æ, CP. wes ðu h., h. westu, h. bêo
ðu _hail!_

hâlb¯ære _wholesome, salutary_.

halc (OET 489) = healh

hald = heald

haldan = healdan

  [[from first edition, printed as:
  hald, haldan = hald, healdan]]

hâleg = hâlig

hâleg- = hâlg-

±hâlettan (¯æ) _to greet, hail, salute_.

hâlettend m. _middle finger (used in saluting)_, WW.

hâlettung f. _greeting, salutation_.

hâlfæst _pious_? _healthy_? RB 72^6.

hâlga I. wk. form of adj. hâlig. II. m. _saint_, _Æ, Ct_. ['_hallow_']

hâlgawaras = hâligwaras

±hâlgian _to 'hallow,' sanctify_, _Æ, Jn_: _consecrate, dedicate,
ordain_, _BH, Bl, Chr_; Æ: _reverence_, ¶_Hy_: _keep holy_, _Bl_.

+hâlgigend m. _sanctifier_, DHy 64^2.

±hâlgung f. _'hallowing,' consecration_, _BH_.

hâlgungbôc f. _benedictional_, NC 299.

hâlgungram m. _consecrated ram_, Æ.

hâli- = hâlig-

hâlig _'holy,' consecrated, sacred_, _A, Lk_: _venerated_, _Æ, G, VPs_:
_godly, saintly_, _CP, Mk_. as sb. _what is holy_, _MtL_. adv. -lîce.

hâligan I. _to heal up, get well_, CP. II. = hâlgian

hâligdæg m. _holy day, Sabbath_, _MkL, LL_. ['_holiday_']

hâligdôm m. _holiness, righteousness, sanctity_, _Æ_; CP: _holy place,
sanctuary, chapel_, Æ: _relics, holy things_, _LL_: _holy office_,
CP 51^1. ['_halidom_']

hâligdômhûs m. '_sacrarium_,' CM 818.

hâligern n. _holy place, sanctuary_.

hâligmônað m. _(holy month), September_.

hâlignes f. _'holiness,' sanctity, religion_, _Bl, Ps_; Æ: _holy place,
sanctuary_, _CP, W_: _holy thing, relic_.

hâligportic m. _sanctuary_, #CJVPs#.

hâlig-rift, -ryft, -reft f. _veil_, Æ.

hâligwæcca m. _vigil-keeper_, LL (224^27).

hâligwæter n. '_holy water_,' _BH_.

hâlig-waras, -ware mp. _saints_, N.

hâligweorc n. _sanctuary_, #APs# 73^7.

halm = healm

hâlor ¶ n? _salvation_. [h¯æl]

hâlp = healp pret. 3 sg. of helpan.

hals- = heals-

hâls- = h¯æls-

hâls f. _salvation_, #Cr# 587?

hâlsere = h¯ælsere

halsgang (WW 190^32) = healsgund

hâlsian (±) (êa) _to adjure, call up, convoke_, _CP, Mt, OET, VPs_:
_exorcise_, LL. [v. '_halse_' and also h¯ælsian, healsian]

hâlsigend I. m. _exorcist_, Æ. II. = h¯ælsigend  [[under "h¯ælsiend"]]

halstân = healstân

hâlsung f. _exorcism_, _LL_. [v. '_halsing_'] (v. also h¯ælsung and
healsung.)

hâlswurðung f. _thanksgiving for safety_, #Ex# 581. [hâls]

halt == healt

halð = heald II.

hâlwenda m. _Saviour_, Æ.

hâlwende _healing, healthful, salutary_, Æ, CP: _sanctifying_, Æ.

hâlwendlic _salutary, wholesome_. adv. -lîce, Æ, CP.

hâlwendnes f. _salubrity_, BH 28^30.

hâlwynde = hâlwende

ham I. m? _under-garment_ ('_subucula_,' OEG), _WW_. ['_hame_'] II. =
hamm

hâm I. m. ds. hâm _'home,' dwelling, house_, _Bl, Jn, LL_; AO: _manor,
estate, hamlet_, _Æ, BH, Mt_. II. adv. _'home,' homewards_, _Chr, Jn_;
Æ. III. '_cauterium_,' A 30·258; 33·390.

hama m. _covering, dress, garment_: _womb, 'puerperium,'_ v. OEG:
_slough of a snake_, NC 299: _bridle_? #Lcd# 3·42^12 (A 30·257).

hâma m. _cricket_, WW. [_Ger._ heimchen]

hâmcûð _familiar_, NG.

hâmcyme m. _home-coming, return_, _Æ_. ['_homecome_']

hamele f. _rowlock_ (only in phr. æt ¯ælcre hamelan _for every oar_, i.e.
_rower_, #Chr# 1039#e#). [_ON._ hamla; v. also hâ]

hamelian _to hamstring, mutilate_, _Chr_. ['_hamble_']

hamer = hamor

-hamer v. clod-h.

±hâmettan _to house serfs_, Ct, LL.

hâmfærelt n. _going home_, AO 146^21.

hâmfæst _resident, settled in or owning a house_, Æ.

hâmfaru f. _attack of an enemy in his house, housebreaking_: _fine for
housebreaking_. [v. LL 2·504]

hâmhenn f. _domestic fowl_, #Lcd# 92a.

+hamian _to establish in a home_? JnL p188^7.

hâmlêas _homeless_, #Rd# 40^9.

hamm I. m. _piece of pasture land, enclosure, dwelling_, _Ct_; ÆL; Mdf.
['_ham_'] II. f. _'ham' (part of leg)_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ.

+hammen _studded with nails (of shoes)_? GD 37^13.

-hamod v. +fiðer-h.

hamola (o^1) _mutilated person_? ANS 98·127. tô hamolan besciran _to
shave the beard off (as insult)_, LL 68, 35, 3.

hamor (o^1, e^2) m. '_hammer_,' _Jul, WW_.

hamorian (amer-) _to beat out, forge_, GPH 396.

hamorsecg m. _hammer-sedge_, #Lcd#.

hamorwyrt f. _black hellebore, wall-pellitory_, _Lcd_ 1·374.
['_hammerwort_']

hâmscîr f. _aedileship_, #Gl#.

-hâmscyld v. riht-h.

hâmsittend m. _home-possessor_.

hâmsittende _living at home_.

hâmsîð m. _return home_, HL 10^273.

hâmsîðian _to return home_, WW 118^18.

hâmsôcn f. _offence of attacking a man in his own house_, _LL_: _the
franchise of holding pleas of this offence and receiving the penalties
for it_: _the penalty itself_, _Ct_. ['_hamesucken_']

hâmsteall m. _homestead_, _Ct_. ['_homestall_']

hâmstede m. '_homestead_,' _Ct_.

hamule (#Chr# 1039#e#) = hamele

hamur = hamor

hâmweard _homewards, towards home, on the way home_, _Chr_; Æ.
['_homeward_']

hâmweardes adv. '_homewards_,' _Chr_.

hâmweorðung f. _ornament of a home_, B 2998.

hâmwerod (eo^2, u^3) n. _household_, BH 191^22.

hâmwerd (Æ) = hâmweard

hâmwyrt f. _house-leek_, _Lcd_. ['_homewort_']

hân f. _(boundary-)stone_, _BC_. ['_hone_']

hana m. _cock_, Æ. [_Ger._ hahn]

hanasang m. _cock-crow_, MH 4^16.

hancrêd (¯æ) m. _cock-crow_, Æ. [crâwan]

hancrêdtîd (o^1) f. _time of cock-crow_, WW 413^35.

hand (o) f. (gds. handa) '_hand_,' _Jn, VPs, WW_; AO, CP, Æ. brâd h.
_palm_. on h. gân _to yield_. on h. syllan _to give a pledge_: _side
(in defining position_), _Æ_. swîðre, winstre h. _right, left, hand_. on
gehwæðere h. _on both sides_: _power, control, possession, charge_, _Ps,
RB_. on h. âgiefan, tô handa l¯ætan _to hand over (to)_. on handa sellan
_promise, bargain_. tô handa healdan _hold (land) of another_. on handa
settan _entrust, commit_: _agency_, _Ps, VPs_: _person regarded as
holder or receiver of something_.

handæx f. _'dextralis,' a kind of axe_, WW 221^22.

handbæftian (ea^2, a^3) _to lament_, NG.

handbana ¶ m. _slayer by hand_, B.

handbell f. '_hand-bell_,' _Ct_.

handbôc f. _'handbook,' manual_, _LL, WW_.

handbona = handbana

handbred n. _palm of the hand, breadth of the hand_, ÆL.

handclâð n. _towel_, _Æ_. ['_handcloth_']

handcops m. _handcuff, manacle_.

handcræft m. _manual skill, power of the hand, handicraft_, _Æ, LL_.
['_handcraft_']

handcwyrn f. _hand-mill_, Æ. [cweorn]

handd¯æda m. _doer with his own hand_, LL.

handele = handle

+handfæstan _to betroth_.

handfæstnung (e^2) f. _joining hands in confirmation of a pledge_, WW.

handfull nf. '_handful_,' _Ep, LPs_.

handgang m. _imposition of hands_: _surrender_.

handgemaca m. _companion in labour_, ÆL 23^421.

handgemôt ¶ n. _battle_, B.

handgesceaft f. _handiwork_, #Gen# 455.

handgesella (o^1) m. _companion_, B 1481.

handgestealla ¶ m. _companion_, B.

handgeswing n. _blow, stroke_, #El# 115.

handgeweald n. _power, possession_, #PPs# 105^30.

handgeweorc n. _'handiwork,' creation_, _Æ, Ps_.

handgewinn n. _manual labour, work, struggle, contest_.

handgewrit n. _handwriting, agreement, deed_.

handgewriðen _woven by hand_, B 1937. [wrîðan]

handgift f. _wedding present_, ¶Hy 10^18.

handgong = handgang

handgripe m. '_hand-grip_,' _B_ 965?

handgrið n. _peace, protection given by the king's hand_, _LL_
(v. 2·494). ['_handgrith_']

handhabbend _red-handed (thief)_, LL 172[6].

handhæf m? n? _burden_, LkL 11^46.

handhamur m. '_hand-hammer_,' _WW_ 448^2.

handhrægl n. _napkin, towel_, WW 127^1.

handhrine m. _touch_, #An# 1022.

handhwîl f. _instant_, _Æ_. ['_handwhile_']

handle f? '_handle_,' _Cp_.

handlêan ¶ n. _requital, recompense_.

handleng(u) f. _a hand's length_, IM 124^74.

±handlian _to 'handle,' feel_, _Lcd_; Æ: _discuss_, _A_ 8·304; 308.

handlîn n. _hand-cloth, napkin_.

handlinga adv. _by hand_, ÆL 11^247: _hand to hand, at close quarters_,
_Æ_. ['_handlings_']

handlocen ¶ _joined together by hand_.

handlung f. '_handling_,' _Æ_.

handmægen ¶ n. _bodily strength_.

handmitta = anmitta

handnægl m. _finger-nail_, #Lcd# 125a.

handplega ¶ m. _fight, battle_.

handprêost m. _domestic chaplain_, Æ.

handr¯æs m. _onrush, attack_, B 2072.

handrôf _famed for strength_, #Ex# 247.

handscalu = handscolu

handscolu ¶ f. _retinue_, B.

handscyldig _condemned to lose a hand_, LL 471[13,1].

handseald _given personally (by the king)_, LL 637[12].

handseax n. _dirk, dagger_, Æ.

handselen '_mancipatio_,' WW 449^29.

handseten f. _attestation, signature, ratification_, Ct.

handsex = handseax

handslyht = andslyht

handsmæll m. _blow with the hand, 'alapa,'_ JnLR 19^3.

handspitel m. _hand-shovel, spade_.

handsporu f. _claw, finger_, B 986.

handstoe n. _cuff, sleeve_, v. ES 38·352.

handswâgelîce adv. _similarly_, RB. [and-]

handswyle m. _swelling on the hand_, WW 205^10.

handtam _tamed by hand_, ÆL 8^86.

handðegn m. _retainer, servant_.

handðwêal n. _washing of the hands_, WW 146^9.

handweorc n. _handiwork_, _Rd, LL_. ['_handwork_']

handworht _made with hands_.

handwundor n. _marvel of handiwork_, B 2768.

handwyrm (o) m. _a kind of insect_, _Cp, WW_. ['_handworm_']

handwyrst f. _wrist_, _WW_. ['_handwrist_']

+hange (o) _disposed, inclined to_, #Rim# 42.

hangelle f. _appendix_, #Rd# 45^6.

hangen pp. of hôn.

hangian (±) (intr.) _to 'hang,' be hanged_, _Æ_; CP: _depend, rest on_,
_Æ_: (tr.) _hang, suspend_, _Æ, Lcd_.

hangra m. _hanger, wooded slope_, Mdf.

hangr¯æd? (ES 39·348) = hancrêd

hangwîte? n. _penally for miscarriage of justice_, EC. [v. '_hangwite_']

hâr I. '_hoar_,' _An_: _hoary, grey, old_, _B, Jud, Met, Wa_. II. = h¯ær

hara m. '_hare_,' _Ep_; Æ.

haranhige _hare's foot (plant)_, #Lcd#.

haranspeccel _viper's bugloss_, WW 299^6.

hâranwyrt = hârewyrt

harasteorra m. _dogstar_, WW 198^34.

hard = heard

hârehûne = hârhûne

hâre-wyrt, hâran- (#Lcd#) f. _a plant, 'colocasia,'_ WW 135^5.

hârhûne f. _horehound_.

hârian _to become hoary or grey_, _Æ, Shr_. ['_hoar_']

hârnes f. _hoariness_, _WW_. ['_hoarness_']

hârung f. _hoariness, age_, #ÆGr# 295^14.

hârwelle, hârwenge (Æ) _hoary, grey-haired_.

hârwengnes f. _hoariness, old age_, WW 198^31.

hâs '_hoarse_,' _WW_.

hâsæta m. _oarsman, rower_, #Chr# 1052#e#. [hâ]

hasewa = haswa wk. form of hasu.

hâshrîman _to sound harshly_.

hâsian _to be or become 'hoarse,'_ _Æ_.

haslhnutu (_WW_) = hæselhnutu

hâsnes f. '_hoarseness_,' _WW_; Æ.

hassuc m. _coarse grass_, _KC_. ['_hassock_']

hâsswêge _sounding hoarsely_, GPH 391.

hasu ¶ (ea) _dusky, grey, ashen_.

hasufâg _grey, ashen_, #Rd# 12^1.

hasupâd _grey-coated_, ¶#Chr# 937.

haswigfeðre ¶ _grey-feathered_.

hât [S 62] I. _'hot,' flaming_, _Gu, Lcd_; Æ, CP, AO: _fervent,
excited_, _Bl_: _intense, violent_, _An, Gu, Ph_: _inspiring_?
_attractive_? #Seaf# 64. II. n. _heat, fire_. III. (±, not + in N) n.
_promise, vow_, _LkL_; CP.

+hata m. _enemy_, WW 393^30.

±hâtan^7 active pret. hê(h)t, hê(h)ton; passive pret. (origly. pres.)
hâtte (_CP, Mt_) _to command, direct, bid, order_, _Æ, Ct_: _summon_,
_Dan_: _vow, promise_, _Jul_: (w. nom. = voc.) _name, call_, _AO_; CP:
_be called_, Æ. ['_hight_']

hâte adv. _hotly, fervidly_, _Æ_. ['_hot_']

hâtheort (y^2) I. n. _anger, rage_. II. (±) _wrathful, furious,
passionate_, Æ, CP: _ardent, whole-hearted_. adv. -lîce.

hâtheorte f. = hâtheort I.

+hâtheortian _to become angry_.

hâtheortnes f. _rage, fury, mania_, Æ, CP: _zeal, fervour_.

±hâthiertan (i, y) _to become angry_, CP.

hâthige m. _anger_, #PPs# 89^7. [hyge]

hâthort (#KGl#) = hâtheort

hat-ian, -igan _to 'hate,' treat as an enemy_, _CP_; Æ.

hâtian _to be or get 'hot,'_ _VPs_.

hatigend m. _enemy_, #ÆGr# 205^8.

hâtigende _becoming hot_, #Lcd#.

hatigendlic _hateful_, ÆL 3^605.

+hâtland n. _promised land_, BH 346^8.

hatol _hostile, bitter_, _Æ, WW (KGl)_. ['_hatel_'; cp. hetol]

hâtte v. hâtan.

hattefagol sb. _hedgehog_, #APs# 103^8 (cp. h¯æren-f.).

hatung f. _hatred_, _LPs_; Æ. ['_hating_']

hâtung f. _heating, inflammation_, #Lcd#.

hâtwende _hot, burning_, #Ex# 74.

+haðerian = heaðorian

haðoliða m. _elbow_, #Lcd# 99a.

-hâwe v. earfoð-h.

hâwere m. _spectator_, CP 229^17.

±hâwian _to gaze on, view, look at, notice_, Æ, CP.

hâwung f. _observation_, AS.

hê m., hêo f., hit n. (pers. pron.) _'he,' she, it_; pl. _they_:
(reflex. pron.) _himself, herself, itself_.

hêa I. np. and nsm. (wk.) of hêah adj. II. = hêah adv. III. = hîe, hî,
nap. of hê.

hêa- = hêah-

heador = heaðor

hêador, hêadêor == hêahdêor

hêaf m. _mourning, lamentation, wailing_, AO. [= hêof]

hêafd- = hêafod-

heafdian _to behead_.

hêafed = hêafod

heafela = hafela

hêafian (Æ) = hêofian

hêaflic _sad, grievous_, #Bl# 123^6.

heafo (B 2478) nap. of hæf.

heafoc = hafoc

hêafod n. gs. hêafdes '_head_,' _Æ, JnR, VPs_. hêafdes ðolian _to
forfeit life_: _top_, _OET_: _source, origin_: _chief, leader_, _CP,
Chr_: _capital (city)_, _AO_.

hêafodæcer (afu) m. _chief field_, WW 147^19.

hêafod¯ædre f. _cephalic vein_, #Lcd# 95b.

hêafodbân n. _skull_, #Lcd#.

hêafodbêag m. _crown_, #Bo# 112^23.

hêafodbend m. _diadem, crown_: _head-bond, fetter about the head_, Æ.

hêafodbeorg f. _helmet_, B 1030.

hêafodbeorht _with a splendid, shining head_, #Rd# 20^2.

hêafodbiscop m. _high priest_, Æ.

hêafodbolla m. _skull_.

hêafodbolster n. _pillow_.

hêafodbotl n. _ancestral seat_, Ct.

hêafodburh f. _chief city_, Æ, AO.

hêafodclâð n. _head-cloth, head-dress_, _WW_; ÆL. ['_headcloth_']

hêafodcwide m. _important saying_, LL: _chapter_, DR.

hêafodcyrice f. _cathedral_, LL.

hêafodece m. _headache_, Æ.

hêafodfrætennes (e^3) f. _hairpin, ornament for the hair_, WW.

hêafod-gemæcca, -gemaca (CP) m. _mate, companion, fellow-servant_.

hêafodgerîm n. _number by heads, greatest number_, #Jud# 309.

hêafodgetel n. _cardinal number_, #ÆGr# 283^8.

hêafodgew¯æde n. _face-covering, veil_, Æ, W.

hêafodgilt m. _deadly sin, capital offence_, LL 380[2].

hêafodgimm ¶ m. _head's gem, eye_.

hêafodgold n. _crown_, #PPs#, W.

hêafodh¯ær n. _hair of the head_, WW.

hêafodhebba m. _beginning_, A 8·304: _prime mover_, ÆL 23^365.

hêafodhrægl (u^2) n. _head-dress_, #Sc# 74^2.

hêafodhrîefðo f. _scurfiness of the head_, #Lcd# 85b.

hêafodiht (e^3) _with a head or tuft_.

hêafodleahter m. _capital crime, deadly sin_, Æ.

hêafodlêas '_headless_,' _WW_; Æ.

hêafodlic _capital, deadly (crime)_, _Bl_. ['_headly_']

hêafodling m. _equal, fellow-servant_, _MtL_ (ud). ['_headling_']

hêafodlond n. _strip of land in a field, left for turning a plough_,
_Ct_; WW. ['_headland_']

hêafod-m¯æg ¶, -mâga § m. _near blood-relation_.

hêafodmann m. _'head-man,' leader, captain_, _WW_; Æ.

hêafodmynster n. _church, cathedral_.

hêafodpanne f. _skull_, _Mt_. ['_headpan_']

hêafodport m. _chief town_, #Chr# 1086.

hêafodrîce n. _empire_, AO 58^31.

hêafodsâr m. _pain in the head_, #Lcd#.

hêafodsîen ¶ f. _(eyesight), eye_.

hêafodslæge (u^2) m. _head of a pillar_, WW 376^15.

hêafodsmæl _'capitium,' part of a woman's dress_, WW 276^18; 369^19.

hêafodstede m. _chief place_, AO: _high place, sacred place_,
LL 470[3,5].

hêafodstôl m. _capital_, AO.

hêafodstôw f. _place for the head_, BH 324^3.

hêafodswîma m. _dizziness_, #Gen# 1568.

hêafodsýn = hêafodsîen

hêafodsynn (¯æ^1) f. _deadly sin_, W 290^25.

hêafodðwêal n. _washing of the head_, WW 146^8.

hêafodwærc m. _pain in the head_, _Lcd_; WW. ['_headwark_']

hêafodweard I. f. _watch over the head_? B 2909: _body-guard_,
LL 444[1]. ['_headward_'] II. m. _chief protector, leader_. III. f.
_chapter_.

hêafodwind m. _chief wind (E, S, W or N wind)_, #Lcd# 3·274.

hêafodwîsa ¶ m. _chief, director_.

hêafodwôð f. _voice_, #Rd# 9^3.

hêafodwund f. _wound in the head_, LL 20[44].

hêafodwylm m. _tears_, #El# 1133: _burning pain in the head_.

hêafodwyrhta m. _chief workman_, ÆH 2·530.

heafola = hafela

hêafre = hêahfore

hêafsang m. _dirge_, WW 430^22. [hêofan]

heafu (B 1862) nap. of hæf.

heafuc (#VPs#) = hafoc

hêafud = hêafod

hêag == hêah

heaga- = hago-

hêage (_Æ_) = hêah adv.

heago- = hago-, hagu-

hêagum v. hêah.

hêah I. (ê) gsm. hêas, asm. hêan(n)e, gp. hêar(r)a, dp. hêagum, hêam,
comp. hîerra (ê, êah, îe, ý); sup. hîehst (êa, ê, ý) _'high,' tall,
lofty_, _Æ, BH, Lcd, VPs, etc._: _high-class, exalted, sublime,
illustrious, important_, _CP, VPs_: _proud, haughty_: _deep_: _right
(hand)_. II. adv. _'high,' aloft_, _ÆGr_.

hêahaltâre m. _high altar_, W.

hêahbeorg m. _mountain_, #PPs# 94^4.

hêahbiscop m. _archbishop, pontiff_: _(Jewish) high priest_, HL 10^430.

hêahbliss f. _exultation_, #PPs# 118^111.

hêahboda m. _archangel_, #Cr# 295.

hêahburg f. _chief city, metropolis_: (¶) _town on an eminence_.

hêahcâsere m. _emperor_, ¶Hy 7^60.

hêahcleofa m. _principal chamber_.

hêah-clif n. nap. -cleofu _high cliff_.

hêahcræft m. _high skill_, #Rd# 36^4.

hêahcræftiga m. _architect_.

hêahcyning ¶ m. _high king, God_.

hêahdêor n. _stag, deer_.

hêahdêorhund (hêador-) m. _stag-hound_.

hêahdêorhunta m. _stag-hunter_, Ct.

hêahdîacon m. _archdeacon_.

hêah-eald* superl. -yldest (CM 36) _excellent, distinguished_.

hêah-ealdor, -ealdormann m. _ruler, patrician_.

hêahengel m. _archangel_, Æ.

hêahfæder m. _patriarch_, Æ, CP: _God_.

hêahfæst _permanent, immutable_, #Wid# 143.

hêahfæsten n. _fortified town, city_.

hêahflôd m. _deep water, high tide_.

hêahfore f. '_heifer_,' _Æ, BH, WW_.

hêahfrêa ¶ m. _high lord_.

hêahfrêols m. _great festival_, LL 344[47].

hêahfrêolsdæg m. _great feast day_, LL 252[25].

hêahfrêolstîd f. _great festival_, LL 252[22,2].

hêahfru (_WW_) = hêahfore

hêahfýr n. _towering flame_, #Whale# 22.

hêahg¯æst m. _Holy Ghost_, #Cr# 358.

hêahgealdor n. _charm_, #PPs# 57^4.

hêahgerêfa m. _high sheriff, chief officer, proconsul, prefect_, Æ.

hêahgesamnung f. _principal synagogue_, #Mk# 5^22.

hêahgesceaft f. _noble creature_, #Gen# 4.

hêahgesceap n. _fate_, B 3084.

hêahgestrêon ¶ n. _rich treasure_.

hêahgetimbrad _high-built_, #Sat# 29.

hêahgetimbru ¶ npl. _lofty edifice_.

hêahgeðring n. _whelming flood_, #Rd# 4^27.

hêahgeðungen = hêahðungen

hêahgeweorc n. _excellent work_.

hêahgnornung ¶ f. _deep grief_.

hêahgod m. _Most High, God_, #PPs# 56^2.

hêahgræft _carved in bas-relief_, WW 348^9.

hêahhâd m. _holy orders_, LL (334^6).

hêahhelm _loftily crested_, ZDA 33·238.

hêahhêolode (êh-) f. _elecampane_, #Lcd# 28b.

hêahheort _proud_, #Da# 540.

hêahhlið ¶ n. _high hill_.

hêahhwiolod (ê^1) _having high wheels_, WW 140^32.

hêahhylte n? _high wood_? Ct.

hêahhyrde m. _archimandrite, head abbot_, OEG 910.

hêahhyrne = êaghyrne

hêahl¯æce m. _learned physician_, MH.

hêahland ¶ n. _mountainous country_.

hêahlârêow m. _head teacher_, WW.

hêahlêce = hêahl¯æce

hêahleornere n. _high teacher, master_, OEG 910.

hêahlic = hêalic

hêahlufe ¶ f. _great love_.

hêahmægen n. _great force_: _power, virtue_, ÆL.

hêahmæsse f. _high mass_.

hêahmæssedæg m. _high-mass day_, NC 300.

hêahmiht § f. _high authority, great might_.

hêahmôd ¶ _high spirited, exultant_: _proud, haughty_.

hêahmôdnes f. _pride_, CP 301^1.

hêahmunt m. _mountain_.

hêahnama m. _most exalted name_, ¶Hy 7^18.

hêahnes (Æ) = hêanes

hêahra v. hêah.

hêahreced ¶ n. _high building, temple_.

hêahrodor m. _high heaven_, #Gen# 151.

hêahrûn = hagorûn

hêahsâcerd m. _high or chief priest_.

hêahs¯æl ¶ f. _great happiness_.

hêahs¯æðêof? m. _chief pirate_, WW.

hêahsangere m. _chief singer_, BH 314^3.

hêahsceaða m. _chief pirate_, OEG 8^228. [scaða]  [[under "sceaða"]]

hêahscêawere (ê^1) m. '_pontifex_,' DR 21^1.

hêahscîreman (ê^1) m. '_procurator_,' DR 193^6.

hêahseld n. _rostrum, throne_.

hêahsele m. _high hall_, B 647.

hêahsetl n. _exalted seat, throne, judgment-seat_, _Æ, JnL_ (e^1).
[v. '_settle_']

hêahsomnung (MkL; ê^1) = hêahgesamnung

hêahstêap _very high_, #Gen# 2839.

hêahstede m. _high place_, B 285.

hêahstefn ¶ _having a high prow_.

hêahstr¯æt m. _highway_, _Ct_. ['_high street_']

hêahstrengðu f. _strength_, #PPs# 107^7.

hêahsunne (ê^1) adj. mp. _very sinful_, MkR 2^15.

hêahsynn f. _deadly sin, crime_.

hêahtîd f. _festival, holy day_, _LL_. ['_hightide_']

hêahtimber m. _lofty building_, #Cra# 45.

hêahtrêow f. _solemn compact_, #Ex# 388.

hêahðearf f. _great need_, #PPs# 117.

hêahðegen m. _chief officer, captain_, Æ: _apostle_, Æ: _angel_.

hêahðegnung f. _important function_, #Ex# 96.

hêahðêod (ê^1) f. _great people_.

hêahðrêa m. _great terror_, #Gen# 2545.

hêahðrymm § m., hêahðrymnes ¶ f. _great glory_.

hêahðu ¶ = hîehðu

hêahðungen _of high rank, illustrious_, AO.

hêahwêofod n. _high altar_, WW 186^21.

hêahweorc = hêahgeweorc

hêahwita m. _high councillor_, #Chr# 1009.

hêahyldest v. hêaheald.

heal = (1) healh; (2) heall I.

hêal (#Bl#) = hâl

hêala m. _hydrocele_, CP 65^5.

healærn n. _hall-building_, B 78.

heald I. n. _protection_, _Chr_ 1036; _KC_. ['_hold_'; = hield] II.
_sloping, inclined, bent_.

+heald = +hield

healdan^7 (a) (±) (tr. and intr.) _to 'hold' ('i-hald'), contain, hold
fast, grasp, retain, possess, inhabit_, _Æ, Chr_; CP. tô handa h. _hold
(land, etc.) of another_: (±) _curb, restrain, rule, reign_, _Chr, CP_:
(±) _keep, guard, preserve, foster, cherish, defend_, _Æ, Bl, Mt, Ps_;
AO: _withhold, lock up_: _maintain, uphold, support_, _Æ, LL_: _regard,
observe, fulfil, do, practise_, _Bl_; Æ: _take care_, CP: _celebrate,
hold (festival)_: _hold out_ (intr.), _last_. ongêan h. _resist_:
_proceed, go_: _treat, behave to, bear oneself_.

+healddagas mp. _kalends_, WW 176^27.

+healde _contented_? _careful_? v. MF 162.

healdend m. _protector, guardian, ruler, king, lord, God_.

+healdendgeorn _continent_, DR 45^10? (a^1).

healdiend '_custodiens_,' #EPs# 114^9.

±healdnes f. _keeping, observance_, BH: _guard, watch_, #APs# 38^2.

healdsum (hal-) _sufficient_, ANS 129·25.

+healdsum _provident, economical, frugal_, CP: _chaste, continent_, ÆL.

±healdsumnes f. _keeping, observance, devotion_, Æ: _custody,
preservation_: _continence, chastity_.

+healdung f. _keeping_.

hêalêce (#Gl#) = hêahl¯æce

hêalede _suffering from hydrocele, ruptured_, CP.

healf (a) I. adj. '_half_,' _A, Ct, Jud, Lcd_; Æ, AO. ðridde h., etc. =
_two and a half, etc._ [_Ger._ drittehalb] II. (a) f. _half_, _Æ, G,
Chr_: _side_, _Gl_ (a), _Mt, Ct_; Æ, AO: _part_, CP.

healfcl¯æmed _half-plastered_, HL 17^267.

healfclungen (a^1) _half-withered_, Cp 265#s#.

healfclypigende adj. _semi-vowel_, #ÆGr#.

healf-cwic, -cucu _half dead_, AO, CP.

healfdêad _half-dead_, #Lcd#.

healfeald (a^1) _half-grown_, #Lcd# 92a.

healffêðe _lame_, GPH 396.

healffrêo _half-free_, W 171^4#e#.

healfhâr _somewhat hoary_, A 8·449.

healfhêafod n. _front part of the head_, #ÆGr# 74^5.

healfhrûh _half-rough_, WW 152^14.

healfhunding m. _cynocephalus_, #Nar#.

healfhwît _somewhat white_, WW 163^7.

healfhýd _half a hide (of land)_, LL 460[7,1].

healfmann m. '_halfman_,' _ÆGr_ 27.

healfmarc _half a mark_ (v. marc).

healfpenigwurð n. _halfpenny-worth_, LL, W.

healfrêad _reddish_, WW 149^35.

healfscyldig _partially guilty_, ZDA 31·23.

healfsester m. _half a 'sester' (measure of bulk)_, WW 444^4. [_L._
sextarius]

healfsinewealt _semicircular_, WW 179^28.

healfsl¯æpende _half-asleep_, LV 3; MH 138^1.

healfsoden _half-cooked_.

healfter = hælfter

healftryndel n. _hemisphere_, WW 140^7.

healfunga _to a certain extent, partially, imperfectly_, Æ, CP.

healfwudu m. _field-balm_, #Lcd# 44b.

healgamen m. _social enjoyment_, B 1066.

healgian = halgian  [[headword spelled "hâlgian"]]

healh m. (? n. at LHy 6^31) (nap. halas) _corner, nook, secret place_,
_CP, Guth, WW_: _corner of land left by the stream in a river valley_,
_Ct_ (v. Mdf). ['_hale_']

healhihte _having many angles_, OEG 121.

hêalic (ê) _high, elevated, exalted, lofty, sublime_, _Æ_; CP: _deep,
profound, intense_, Æ, CP: _lordly, noble, great, illustrious,
distinguished_, _Æ_; CP: _proud, haughty_: _egregious, heinous_, W. adv.
-lîce _highly, aloft_, _Æ_: _in or to high position or rank, loftily_,
_BH_: _intensely, very_, _Bl_. ['_highly_']

hêalicnes f. _sublimity, majesty_, Æ.

heall I. f. _'hall,' dwelling, house_, _B, Mt_; Æ, CP. II. = healh. III.
_rock_, OEG 4111.

heallic _palatial_.

heallrêaf n. _wall-tapestry_, Ct.

heallwâhrift n. _wall-tapestry_, Ct.

healm I. (a, æ) m. _'haulm,' stalk, straw_, _Lcd, MtL, VPs_: _'culmen,'
thatched roof_? _land_? LL 116[61]. II. = helm

healmstrêaw n. _stubble_, #SPs# 82^14.

healoc = holc

healp pret. 3 sg. of helpan.

healreced n. _hall-building_, B 68.

heals (a) m. _neck_, _Gen_: _prow of a ship_. ['_halse_'; _Ger._ hals]

healsbêag ¶ m. _collar, necklace_.

healsbeorg f. _neck-armour_, OEG.

hêalsbôc f. _phylactery_, G. [hâls]

healsbrynige _corslet_, v. OEG 2^418.

healsfæst adj. _as a slave_, #Gen# 2238.

healsfang n. _fine prescribed in substitution for capital and other
punishments, preferential share of the_ 'wergeld,' _LL_ (v. 2·489).
['_halsfang_']

healsgebedda f. _beloved bedfellow, consort, wife_, B 63.

healsgund (a^1) m. _neck-tumour_, #Lcd#, WW.

healsian _to entreat earnestly, beseech, implore_, AO, CP. [v. also
hâlsian, h¯ælsian]

healsiendlic (â), -igendlic _that may be intreated_, #APs# 89^13:
_imploring_, GD 17^23. adv. -lîce _importunately_.

  [[Original entry:
  healsiendlic (â) _that may be intreated_, #SPs# 89^13. adv. -lîce
  _importunately_.]]

healsittend ¶ m. _sitter in hall_.

healsleðer n. _reins_, OET 522.

healsmægeð f. _beloved maid_, #Gen# 2155.

healsmyne m. _necklace_, Æ. [mene]

healsod (a^1; e^2) mn. _head-cloth_.

healsôme f. _neck-tumour_, #Lcd# 132b.

healsrefeðer (a^1) f. _feathers of a pillow, down_, #Rd# 41^86. [cp.
_OHG._ halsare '_cervical_']

heals-scod, -ed = healsod

healstân (a) m. _small cake_, WW.

healsung f. _prayer, supplication, conjuring, entreaty_. [v. '_halse_'
and also hâlsung and h¯ælsung]

healsunggebed (a) n. _litany_.

healsungtîma (a) m. _time of supplication_, NC 299.

healswærc m. _pain in the neck_, #Lcd# 113a.

healswriða m. _necklace_, #Rd# 5^4.

healswyrt (a) f. _a plant, daffodil_? '_epicurium, auris leporis_,'
_Lcd, WW_; OEG. ['_halswort_']

healt (eo) _'halt,' limping, lame_, _AO_.

healt- = heald-

healtian _to 'halt,' limp_, _CP, VPs_ (a); Æ: _hesitate_, ÆL 18^98:
_fall away_, _BH_.

healðegn ¶ m. _hall-officer_.

healwudu m. _woodwork of hall_, B 1317.

hêam v. hêah.

hêam-ol, -ul _miserly, frugal_, Cp.

hêamolscipe m. _miserliness_, NC 300.

hêan I. _lowly, despised, poor, mean, abject_, _B, VPs_; Æ, AO.
['_hean_'] adv. hêane. II. v. hêah. III. (±) _to raise, exalt, extol_,
_BH_. [= *hîen, hýn; '_high_']

hêanes f. '_highness_,' _A_ (hêah-), _CP_: _something high, high place,
height_, _Mt_ (hêah-), _VPs_. on hêanissum _in the highest_, '_in
excelsis_,' Æ: _excellence, sublimity_, CP: _high rank_.

hêanhâd m. _difficulty_, WW.

hêanlic _ignominious, abject, poor_, AO. adv. -lîce.

hêanmôd ¶ _downcast, depressed, sad_.

hêannes I. (ê) f. _treading down_, NG. II. = hêanes

hêanspêdig _poor_, #Cra# 26.

hêap mf. (_of things_) '_heap_,' _Cp, CP_: _host, crowd, assembly,
company, troop, band_, _Bl_; Æ, CP.

±hêapian _to 'heap' up, collect, bring together, accumulate_, _Lk_.

hêapm¯ælum adv. _by companies, in troops, flocks_, _Æ, CP_; AO.
['_heapmeal_']

hêapum adv. _in heaps, in troops_.

hêapung f. _heap_, _BH_. ['_heaping_']

hear- (N) = heor-

hêara = hêahra (v. hêah)

hearcnung = heorcnung

heard (a) _'hard,' harsh, severe, stern, cruel (things and persons)_,
_B, Bl, Cr, Mt, Lcd_: _strong, intense, vigorous, violent_, _B, Bl_:
_hardy, bold_, _B_; AO.

heardcwide m. _harsh speech, abuse_ (or ? hearmcwide), #Cr# 1444.

hearde adv. _'hard,' hardly, firmly, very severely, strictly,
vehemently_, _Æ_: _exceedingly, greatly_, Æ.

heardecg I. ¶ _sharp of edge_. II. f. _sword_, #El# 758.

heardhara m. _a fish, mullet_? Cp.

heardhêaw _chisel_, Cp 408#c#.

heardheort _hard-hearted_, Æ: _stubborn, obstinate_, Æ.

heardheortnes f. _hard-heartedness_, Æ, CP.

heardhicgende ¶ _brave_.

±heardian _to be or become hard_, _Lcd_: _harden_, _Lcd_. ['_hard_']

hearding ¶ m. _bold man, hero_.

heardlic _severe, harsh, terrible_: _excessive_. adv. -lîce _harshly,
resolutely, severely, sternly_: _stoutly, bravely_, Æ: _excessively_:
_hardly_ ('_paulatim_,' '_tractim_'), ES 42·174.

heardlicnes f. _austerity_.

heardmôd _brave, bold, over-confident_, Æ: _obstinate_, ÆL 36^326.

heardmôdnes f. _obstinacy_, ÆH 1·252^18.

heardnebba m. _raven_, ÆH 2·144^15.

heardnes f. '_hardness_,' _Ep, Mt, Lcd, RB_.

heardra (OEG) = heardhara

heardr¯æd _firm, constant_, #Gen# 2348.

heards¯ælig _unfortunate, unhappy_.

heards¯ælnes f. _calamity_, AO 104^17.

heards¯ælð f. _hard lot, calamity, unhappiness_: _misconduct,
wickedness_, CP.

heardwendlîce _strictly_, BH 365^15.

hearg (æ, e) nap. heargas, (e) m. _temple, altar, sanctuary, idol_, AO,
CP: _grove_? #Az# 110.

heargeard (herh-) m. _dwelling in the woods_, #Wif# 15.

hearglic (h) _idolatrous_, WW 236^2.

heargtræf (æ^1) n. _idol-temple_, B 175.

heargweard m. _temple-warden, priest_ (herig-), #An# 1126.

hearh == hearg

hearm (e) I. m. _damage_, _'harm,' injury, evil, affliction_, _B, Gen_;
Æ, CP: _grief, pain_, _Gen_: _insult, calumny_. II. adj. _harmful,
malignant, evil_.

hêarm = hrêam

hearma m. _shrew-mouse_? _weasel_? OET (Cp 666). [_OHG._ harmo]

hearmascinnen _made of weasel skins_? #Chr# 1075#d#.

hearmberg (æ) m. _grave_, #Rune Casket#.

hearmcwalu f. _great suffering_, #Cr# 1609.

hearmcweodelian (#VPs#) wv. = hearmcweðan

hearmcweðan^5 _to speak evil of, revile_, NG.

hearmcweðend (e^1) m. _slanderer_, #JPs# 71^4.

hearmcwiddian _to calumniate_, #Bo#.

hearmcwide ¶ m. _calumny, blasphemy_: _heavy sentence, curse_.

hearmcwidol _evil-speaking, slanderous_, Æ.

hearmcwidolian (eo^2, e^3) _to calumniate_, #Ps# 118^122.

hearmcwidolnes f. _slander_, #EPs# 118^134.

hearmdæg m. _day of grief_, B 3153.

hearmedwît ¶ n. _grievous reproach_.

hearm-ful, -fullic _hurtful, noxious_.

-hearmgeorn v. un-h.

hearmheortnes f. _murmuring, complaint_, WW 511^16.

hearmian _to 'harm,' injure_, _Æ_.

hearmlêoð ¶ n. _elegy, lamentation_.

hearmlic _harmful, grievous_, Æ.

hearmloca ¶ m. _prison_: _hell_.

hearmplega m. _fight, strife_, #Gen# 1898.

hearmscaða m. _terrible enemy_, B 766.

hearmscearu ¶ f. _affliction, punishment, penalty_. [sceran]
  [[under "scieran"]]

hearmslege m. _grievous blow_, #Cr# 1435.

hearmspr¯æc f. _calumny_, WW 198^3.

hearmstæf ¶ m. _harm, sorrow, tribulation_.

hearmtân m. _shoot of sorrow_, #Gen# 992.

hearpe (æ) f. '_harp_,' _Æ, VPs_; CP.

hearpenægel m. _plectrum_.

hearpere (a) m. _harper_, _Bo, Ln_; Æ, CP.

hearpestre f. _(female) harper_, WW 190^6.

hearpestreng m. '_harp-string_,' _ApT_.

hearpian _to 'harp,'_ _Bo_; Æ.

hearpnægel = hearpenægel

hearpsang m. _psalm_, WW 129^40.

hearpslege m. _plectrum (instrument for striking the harp)_, OEG:
_harp-playing_.

hearpswêg m. _sound of the harp_, #BlPs# 150^3.

hearpung f. '_harping_,' _Bo_.

hearra ¶ (æ, e, ie, eo) m. _lord, master_, _Chr_ (æ), _Gen_. ['_her_';
_Ger._ herr]

hêarra = hêahra (v. hêah)

hearstepanne = hierstepanne  [[under "hierste"]]

hêarsum = hiersum  [[headword spelled "hîersum"]]

heart (NG) == heord, heorot

-hearwa v. Sigel-h.

hêas v. hêah.

heascan = hyscan

heasu = hasu

heaðo- = heaðu- (= _war_)

heaðor ¶ n. _restraint, confinement_.

±heaðorian (e^2) _to shut in, restrain, control_.

hêaðrym = hêahðrymm

heaðubyrne ¶ f. _war-corslet_.

heaðudêor ¶ _bold, brave_.

heaðufremmende _fighting_, #El# 130.

heaðufýr ¶ n. _cruel fire_.

heaðugeong _young in war_, #Fin# 2.

heaðugiemm m. _wound got in battle_, #Rd# 57^3.

heaðugrim ¶ _fierce_.

heaðulâc ¶ n. _battle-play, battle_.

heaðulind f. _shield of linden wood_, ¶#Chr# 937.

hêaðulîðende ¶ m. _seafaring warrior_.

heaðum¯ære _famed in battle_, B 2802.

heaður¯æs ¶ m. _onrush, attack_.

heaðurêaf n. _war-gear_, B 401.

heaðurinc ¶ m. _warrior_.

heaðurôf ¶ _famed in war, brave_.

heaðusceard? _dinted in war_, B 2830? (or ? heaðuscearp _battle-sharp_).

heaðusêoc _wounded_, B 2754.

heaðusigel m. _sun_, #Rd# 72^16.

heaðustêap ¶ _towering in battle_.

heaðuswât ¶ m. _blood of battle_.

heaðusweng m. _battle-stroke_, B 2581.

heaðutorht _clear as a battle-cry_, B 2553.

heaðuw¯æd f. _armour_, B 39.

heaðuweorc n. _battle-deed_, B 2892.

heaðuwêrig _weary from fighting_, #Wald# 2^17.

heaðuwylm ¶ (æ^3, e^3) m. _fierce flame_.

hêaum = hêagum dp. of hêah.

+hêaw n. _gnashing, grinding_.

hêaw- = h¯æw- (hêawi, Cp 303#c# = h¯æwen)

±hêawan^7 _to 'hew,' hack, strike, cleave, cut, cut down, kill_, _Æ, BH,
Chr, Jud, LL_: _make by hewing_, _A_. æftan h. _to slander_, W 160^4.

heawen (K) = heofon

-hêawere v. hrîðer-, wudu-h.

-hebba v. hêafod-h.

±hebban^6 (æ) pres. 3 sg. hôf, pl. hôfon, pp. hafen (hæfen) (wk. forms
in LWS, pret. hefde, pp. hefod) _to 'heave,' raise, lift, lift up,
exalt_, _Æ, B, Bl, Ps_; CP: intr. _rise_, W 100^3.

hebbe = hæbbe v. habban.

-hebbe, -hebbing v. ûp-h.

hebbendlic _exalted_, DR 181^14.

hebeld = hefeld

heben = heofon

heber = hæfer

hebuc = hafoc

hecc = hæc

heced = hacod

hêcen n. _kid_, ES 35·332; NC 357.

hecg (#Chr# 547#e#?) = hege

hecga-spind, -swind = hagospind

±hêdan I. (w. g.) _to 'heed,' observe_, _B, LL_; Æ: _look after, care
for, guard, protect, take charge of_: _obtain, receive, take_, _Æ_. II.
= hýdan

hedclâð m. _a coarse, thick, upper garment like a chasuble_, #Lcd#
1·346^17.

hêddern (ý) n. _storehouse_.

hêde pret. 3 sg. of hêgan.

heden m. _robe, hood, chasuble_, LL.

hedendlic _captious_, OEG 3208. adv. -lîce, WW 199^1.

hefaldian = hefeldian

hefde I. (#VPs#) = hæfde pret. 3 sg. of habban. II. v. hebban.

hefe (æ) m. _weight, burden_, Æ: '_mina, talentum_,' GPH 396.

hefeful _severe_, RB 49^18.

hefeg == hefig

hefeld m. _weaver's beam_, _Gl_. [v. '_heald_']

±hefeldian (a^2) _to fix the weft, begin the web_, #Gl#.

hefeldðr¯æd m. _thread (for weaving)_, #Gl#.

hefelgyrd (e^3) f. _'liciatorium,' weaver's shuttle_, #Gl#.

hefelic = hefiglic

hefelîce = hefiglîce

hefen I. (æ) f. _burden, load_? RB 49^13. II. = heofon

hefetîme = hefigtîme  [[under "hefigtýme"]]

hefeð pres. 3 sg. of hebban.

hefgian = hefigian

hefig (æ) '_heavy_,' _Met, Mt_: _important, grave, severe, serious_, _A,
Bl, Mt_: _oppressive, grievous_, _Ps, LL_. [hebban] adv. hefige, _Ps_.

±hefigian _to make heavy_, _VPs_: _weigh down, oppress, afflict,
grieve_, _BH, CP, Mt_: _aggravate, increase_: _become heavy, depressed,
weakened_, _CP, Gu_. ['_heavy_']

hefiglic _weighty, serious, severe, burdensome, grievous, sad_, Æ. adv.
-lîce, _Æ, CP, G_. ['_heavily_']

hefigmôd _oppressive_, #ERPs# 54^4.

hefignes (æ) f. _'heaviness,' weight, burden, affliction_, _MtL_; CP:
_dulness, torpor_, _Bo_ (æ).

hefigtýme (î^3) _grievous, severe, troublesome, oppressive_, Æ. [têam]

hefigtýmnes f. _trouble_, Æ.

hefod wk. pp., hefð pres. 3 sg. of hebban.

hefon = heofon

heft- = hæft-

hefug = hefigu pl. of hefig, CP 285^1.

hêg == hîeg

±hêgan ¶ _to perform, achieve_: _hold (a meeting)_.

hegdig = hygdig

hege (ea) m. _'hedge,' fence_, _Æ, Gl_; Mdf.

hegeclife f. _hedge-clivers_, #Lcd# 20a.

hegegian = hegian

hegehymele f. _hop-plant_, WW 302^5.

hegel (#VPs#) = hægl, hagol

heger¯æw f. '_hedgerow_,' _KC_ (ê^3).

hegerife f. _cleavers, goose grass_, _Lcd_. ['_hairif_']

hegesâhl m. _hedge-stake_, GD 24^28.

hegessugge _hedge-sparrow_, _WW_. [sucga; '_haysugge_']

±hegian _to fence in, hedge, enclose_, _Sc_. grep h. _to cut a grip_, LL
455[13]. ['_hay_']

hêgnes = hêanes

hegstæf m. _fence, enclosure_, WW 205^31.

hegstald- = hægsteald-

hêh (#VPs#, N) = hêah

hêh- = hêah-

+hêhan (VHy) = hêan III.

hê hê indicates laughter, _ÆGr_. ['_he_']

hehstald = hagosteald

hehstald- = hægsteald-

hêht pret. 3 sg. of hâtan.

hêhðu = hîehðu

+heige (#KGl# 83^40) = +hæge

hêista = hêhsta v. hêah.

hêiweg m. _highway_? EC 130´.

hel == hell

hêla (¯æ) m. '_heel_,' _JnL, Lcd, OET, WW_.

±helan^4 _to conceal, cover, hide_, _AO, VPs_; CP. ['_hele_'; _Ger._
hehlen]

hêlan I. (oe) _to calumniate_, MtR 5^44. II. = h¯ælan I.

held I. = hyld, hyldo. II. = hield

heldan = hieldan

helde I. f. _tansy_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ. ['_helde_'] II. = hyldo

hele f. _subterfuge_, _LL_ (320^17). ['_hele_']

hele- = helle-, ele-

hêlend = h¯ælend

helerung = heolorung

heleð = hæleð

helf- = healf-, hielf-

helfan _to halve_, Cp 303#b#? (herbid).

helgod = hellgod

helhrûne = hellerûne

±helian _to conceal, cover, hide_, _Æ, LL_. ['_hele_']

hêlic = hêahlic

hêlîce = hêalîce

hell f. _Hades_, _Æ, VPs_: _'hell,' infernal regions, place of torment,
Gehenna_, _Bo, RB_; AO, CP, Æ. [helan]

hellbend mf. _bond of hell_, B 3072.

hellcniht m. _devil, demon_, ÆL 3^372.

hellcræft m. _hellish power_, #An# 1104.

hellcund _of hell_, W 254^15.

hellcwalu ¶ f. _pains of hell_.

helldor ¶ n. _gate of hell_.

hellebealu n. _hell-bale_, #Cr# 1427.

hellebrôga m. _terror of hell_, #LPs#.

hellebryne m. _hell-fire_, #Jud#, W.

hellec¯ægan pl. _keys of hell_, MFH 128.

helleceafl m. _jaws of hell_, #An# 1702.

hellecinn n. _hellish race_, #Cr# 1620.

helleclamm m. _hell-bond_, #Gen# 373.

helledêofol ¶ mn. _devil_.

helle-dor § n., -duru § f. _gate of hell_.

helleflôr m. _floor of hell, courts of hell_, #Sat# 70.

hellefýr n. _hell-fire_.

helleg¯æst (a^3) m. _spirit of hell_.

hellegeat n. _gate of hell_, ÆH 1·288, MP 1·610.

hellegrund ¶ m. _abyss of hell_.

hellegrut m. _pit of hell_, OEG 684.

hellegryre m. _horror of hell_, #Sat# 433.

helle-hæft §, -hæfta §, -hæftling ¶ m. _prisoner of hell, devil_.

hellehêaf m. _wailings or howlings of hell_, #Gen# 38.

hellehinca m. _hell-limper, devil_, #An# 1173. [cp. _Ger._ hinken]

hellehund m. _hell-hound_, KC 3·350^18.

hellehûs n. _hell-house_, #Gu# 649.

hellelic = hellic

helleloc n. _hell-prison_, GD 325^30.

hellemægen n. _troop of hell_, MFH 166.

hellemere m. _Stygian lake_, WW.

hellenîð m. _torments of hell_, #Gen# 775.

hellerûne f. _pythoness, sorceress_, Æ.

hellescealc m. _devil_, #Sat# 133.

hellesceaða = hellsceaða

hellesêað m. _pit of hell_.

hellestôw f. _infernal region, hell_, GD 332^10.

hellesûsl n. _hell-torment_, Æ.

helleðegn (hel-) ¶ m. _devil_.

hellewîte n. _hell-pains, torment_, Æ.

hellewîtebrôga m. _horror of hell-torment_, W 151^21.

hellfiren f. _hellish crime_, #Part# 6.

hellfûs ¶ _bound for hell_.

hellgeðwing n. _confinement in hell_. #Gen# 696.

hellgod n. _god of the lower world_.

hellheort _terrified_, NC 301.

hellheoðo f. _vault of hell, hell_, #Sat# 700 (or ? two words).

hellic _hellish_, _Æ_. ['_hellick_']

hellsceaða m. _hell-foe, devil_: '_infernus_.'

hell-træf, nap. -trafu n. _devil's temple_, #An# 1693.

helltrega m. _hell-torture_, #Gen# 73.

hell-waran, -ware mp., -waru fp. _dwellers in hell_, Æ.

hellwerod n. _host of hell_, W.

hellwiht (hel-) fn. _devil_, W 186^2.

helm m. _protection, defence, covering, crown_, _Æ, Rd_: _summit, top
(of trees)_, _Æ, Bo, WW_; CP: _helmet_, _Cp, WW_: (¶) _protector, lord_.
['_helm_']

helma m. _'helm,' rudder_, _Bo, Cp, WW_; Æ.

helm-b¯ære, -berende _leafy_.

helmberend m. ¶ _helmeted warrior_.

±helmian (y) _to cover, crown_, _An_: _provide with a helmet_, _ÆGr_.
['_helm_'; '_i-helmed_']

-helmig v. lêaf-h.

helmiht _leafy_, WW 395^5; 493^28.

helmweard (holm-) m. _pilot_, #An# 359.

hêlo = h¯ælu

helor = heolor

help (y) fm. _'help,' succour, aid_, _AO, B, Bl_.

helpan^3 (w. g. or d.) _to 'help,' support, succour_, _Æ, CP, Ct, G, LL,
Ps_: _benefit, do good to_, _Lcd_ (intr.), _LL_: _cure, amend_, _Mk_.

helpe f. = help

helpend m. '_helper_,' _Bl_.

helpendlic _auxiliary_.

helrûn = helleruna  [[headword spelled "hellerûne"]]

helrûna m. _hellish monster_, B 163.

helrýnegu f. _sorceress, witch_, WW 472^11.

hêlspure f. _heel_, #VPs#.

helt I. = hilt. II. pres. 3 sg. of heldan. III. (#KGl#) = hielt pres. 3
sg. of healdan.

helðegn = helleðegn

helur == heolor

hem m. _'hem,' border_, _WW_ 125^13.

+hême? _customary_? AS 32^24.

hemed (BC 2·522´) v. hemman.

hêmed = h¯æmed

hêmeð = h¯æmed

hemeðe _under-garment_. [_Ger._ hemd]

hemlic (Æ) = hymlic

hemman _to stop up, close_, #PPs# 106^42. [_MHG._ hemmen]

hemming m. _shoe of undressed leather_, _WW_ 468^31. ['_heming_']

hen == henn

hên = hêan

hên- = hîen-

hênan = hîenan

+hendan _to hold_, #PPs# 138^8. [hand]

+hende _near, at hand_, _Æ, Mk_: _handy, convenient_, _AO_. adv. _near,
at home_, _Æ_. ['_hend_']

-hendig v. list-h.

+hendnes f. _neighbourhood, proximity_, Æ.

henep = hænep

heng pret. 3 sg. of hôn.

hengeclif n. _overhanging cliff_, WW 180^4.

hengen f. _hanging_, Æ: _cross_, Æ: _rack, torture_, Æ: _imprisonment_.

hengenwîtnung f. _imprisonment_, LL 471[16].

hengest, hengst m. _stallion, steed, horse, gelding_, _Ct, WW_; Æ.
['_hengest_']

hengetrêow (enge-) n. _gallows_, GPH 395.

hengwîte n. _fine for not detaining an offender_, LL 496[4].

henn (æ) f. '_hen_' _A, Mt, Lcd_.

henna m. _fowl_, LL (220^13).

hennebelle (æ) f. _henbane_.

hennfugol m. _hen_, Ct.

hentan _to pursue, attack_, _LL_; Æ: (±) _appropriate, seize_, _Chr_.
['_hent_,' '_i-hente_']

hênð = hýnð

hênðu = hýnðu  [[under "hýnð"]]

henu = heonu

hêo I. nasf. and nap. of pron. 3 pers. _'she,' they_. II. ¶ = hîew

hêodæg adv. _to-day_, #Gen# 661. [_Ger._ heute]

hêof I. m. _wailing, mourning, grief_, Æ, AO. II. str. pret. 3 sg. of
hêofan.

hêofan^{7?} (pret. hêof, hôf, hêofon) _to lament_, CP.

heofen = heofon

hêofendlic _dismal, mournful_, WW. adv. -lîce.

±hêof-ian, -igian _to lament_, Æ.

heofig- = hefig-

hêofigendlic _mourning, lamenting_, A 10·146; 188.

hêoflic _lamentable_.

hêofod == hêafod

heofog (#Bl#) == hefig

heofon (e) mf. (often in pl.) _sky, firmament_, _Æ, Bo, VPs_: '_heaven_'
_Æ, Mt_: _the power of heaven_, _Mt, Lk_.

hêofon I. f. _lamentation_? #Ex# 46. II. str. pret. pl. of hêofan.

heofonbeacen n. _sign in the sky_, #Ex# 107.

heofonbeorht ¶ _heavenly bright_.

heofonbiggende '_cælebs_,' DHy. [_ON._ byggja]

heofonbýme f. _heavenly trumpet_, #Cr# 949.

heofoncandel ¶ f. _light of the heavens, sun, moon, stars_.

heofoncenned _heaven-born_, DHy 108^4.

heofoncolu npl. _heat of the sun_, #Ex# 71.

heofoncund _celestial, heavenly_, CP.

heofoncundlic _heavenly_, W.

heofoncyning m. _king of heaven, Christ_, _Bl_ 201. ['_heavenking_']

heofondêma m. _heavenly ruler_, #Sat# 658.

hêofondlîce = hêofendlîce

heofondrêam ¶ m. _joy of heaven_.

heofonduguð f. _heavenly host_, #Cr# 1655.

heofone (Æ, W) = heofon

heofonengel m. ¶ _angel of heaven_.

heofonfugol ¶ m. _fowl of the air_.

heofonfýr n. _fire from heaven_, W 262^15.

heofonhâlig _holy and heavenly_, #An# 728.

heofonhâm ¶ m. _heavenly home_.

heofonhêah _reaching to heaven_, _Da_ 553. ['_heavenhigh_']

heofonheall f. _heavenly hall_, LL (382^10).

heofonhlâf § m. _bread of heaven, manna_.

heofonhrôf m. ¶_vault of heaven, heaven_: _roof, ceiling_.

heofonhwealf ¶ f. _vault of heaven_.

heofonhyrst f. _ornament of the heavens_, #Gen# 2189.

heofonisc (e^2) _heavenly_, AO 1^6.

heofonlêoht n. _heavenly light_, #An# 976.

heofonlêoma m. _heavenly light_, #An# 840.

heofonlic _'heavenly,' celestial_, _Bl_; Lk. adv. -lîce, #ÆGr#, DHy.

heofonmægen ¶ n. _heavenly force_.

heofonrîce n. _kingdom of heaven_, _Bl, Cr_; AO. ['_heavenric_']

heofonsetl n. _throne of heaven_, DD 277.

heofonsteorra ¶ m. _star of heaven_.

heofonstôl m. _throne of heaven_, #Gen# 8.

heofontimber n. _heavenly structure_, #Gen# 146.

heofontorht ¶ _very bright, glorious_.

heofontungol ¶ n. _heavenly luminary_.

heofonðrêat m. _heavenly company_, #Sat# 222.

heofonðrymm m. _heavenly glory_.

heofon-ware, -waran mp., -waru fp. _inhabitants of heaven_, _Æ_.
['_heavenware_']

heofonwealdend (e^2) '_arcitenens_,' OEG 23^10.

heofonweard ¶ m. _heaven's keeper, God_.

heofonwerod n. _heavenly host_, W.

heofonwlitig _divinely fair_, NC 301.

heofonwolcen ¶ n. _cloud of heaven_.

heofonwôma ¶ m. _terrible noise from heaven_.

heofonwuldor n. _heavenly glory_, ¶Hy 6^12.

hêofsið m. _lamentable state_, #Rim# 43? [hêof]

heofun = heofon

hêofung f. _lamentation, mourning_, Æ.

hêofungdæg m. _day of mourning_, Æ.

hêofungtîd f. _time of mourning_, Æ.

heolan = helan

heold pret. 3 sg. of healdan.

heoldan = healdan

heolfor ¶ n. _gore, blood_.

heolfrig ¶ _gory, bloody_.

heolor (e^1, e^2, u^2) f. _scales, balance_.

heolorbledu (e^1, u^2) f. _the scale of a balance_, WW 427^35.

heolorian _to weigh, ponder_, #Gl#.

heolorung (e^1, e^2) f. _'momentum,' the turning of a scale_, WW 450^12.

heoloðcynn n. _denizens of hell_, #Cr# 1542.

-hêoloðe v. hêah-h.  [[headword spelled "hêahhêolode"]]

heoloðhelm ¶ (æ) m. _helmet which makes the wearer invisible_.

heolp = healp

heolr- = heolor-

heolstor (e^2) I. m. _darkness, concealment, cover, hiding-place,
retreat_. [helan] II. adj. _dark, shadowy_, Æ.

heolstorcofa m. _dark chamber, grave_, #Ph# 49.

heolstorhof n. _hell_, #El# 764.

heolstorloca ¶ m. _prison, cell_.

heolstor-sceado § f., -scuwa § m. _concealing shade, darkness_.

heolstrig _shadowy, obscure_, WW.

heolt = healt

heom dp. of hê, hêo, hit.

heona (_LkL_), heonan, _VPs_ (io), heonane (_Gen_) = heonon(e)

heono (NG) = heonu

heonon, heonone _hence, from here, away_, _Mt_: _from now_. h. forð
_henceforth_. ['_hen_']

heononsið m. _departure, death_, #Dom# 86, #Bk# 21.

heononweard _transient_.

heonu (an(n)a, âne, eno, (he)ono) _if, but, therefore, moreover,
whether_, ANS 91·205.

heonun (_Mt_) = heonon

hêop (#LPs# 67^14) = hêap

hêopbremel (y^2) m. _dog-rose, bramble_, _Lcd_. [v. '_hip_']

hêope f. _'hip,' seed-vessel of wild-rose_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_; Æ: _bush,
brier_.

heor = heorr

heora gp. of hê, hêo, hit.

hêoran = hîeran

heorcnian (e, y) tr. and intr. _to 'hearken,' listen_, _Æ, Guth_.

heorcnung f. _'hearkening,' listening, power of hearing_, _Æ_.

heord I. (e, io) f. _'herd,' flock_, _Æ, Mt, WW_; CP: _keeping, care,
custody_, CP. II. _sycamore_, LkR 19^4. [heorot-?] III. = hîred

heordan pl. _'hards' (of flax), tow_, _Cp, WW_.

heorde I. (#VPs#) == hierde. II. = heord

±heordnes f. _custody, keeping, watch_.

heordr¯æden f. _custody, care, keeping, watch, ward_, ÆL(y^1).

+heordung f. _guard, watch_, #ERPs# 38^2.

hêore I. ¶ (ý) _pleasant, secure_, _B_: _gentle, mild, pure_, _Gen_.
['_here_'] II. = hîere

  [[Cross-reference uncertain: may be form of "hîera", see "hêah".]]

heorl = eorl

heoro == heoru

hêorod = hîered

heorot m. _'hart,' stag_, _Bo_ (heort), _VPs_ (-ut).

heorotberge f. _buckthorn-berry_, WW.

heorotbrembel m. _buckthorn_, #Lcd#.

heorotbrêr f. _buckthorn_, LkR 17^6 (heart-).

heorotcl¯æfre f. _'hart-clover,' hemp agrimony_, _Lcd_.

heorotcrop m. _cluster of hartwort flowers_.

heorotsmeoru n. _hart's grease_, #Lcd# 45a.

heorotsol n. _stag's wallowing-place_, Ct.

heorr mf. _hinge_, _B, Bo, Cp, LPs_: _cardinal point_, _Lcd_.
['_harre_']

heorra = (1) hearra; (2) heorr

heort I. (±) _high-minded, stout-hearted_, ÆL. II. == heorot

heortan = hiertan

heortancnys f. '_(com)pulsus cordis_'? v. ZDA 31·13n.

heortbucc m. _roebuck_, WW 119^12.

heortcoðu f. _heart disease_, #Lcd# 65b.

heorte f. _heart (organ)_, _Lcd, VPs_: _soul, spirit_, _A, B, G, RB,
VPs_: _will, desire_, _VPs_: _courage_, _Gen, VPs_: _intellect_, _Mt,
JnL_.

heortece m. _'heartache,' pain at the heart_, _Lcd_.

heorten (y) _of a hart_, #Lcd# 1·216^15.

heortgesida pl. _entrails_, Æ.

heortgryre m. _terror of heart_, W 86^15.

heorthama m. _pericardium, internal fat_, Æ.

heorthogu f. _heart-care_, W 177^7.

heortlêas _dispirited_, DD 124, W 137^22.

+heortlîce adv. _cheeringly_, GD 317^16.

heortlufu f. _hearty love_, ¶Hy 9^29.

heortscræf n. _heart_, DD 39.

heortsêoc _ill from heart disease_.

heortwærc m. _pain at the heart_, #Lcd#.

heorð (e) m. _'hearth,' fireplace_, _Gl, Az_: _house, home_, _Æ, LL_.

heorð- = eorð-

heorða I. m. _deer-_ (_or goat-_?) _skin_, WW 337^3. II. (#HGl# 483) =
heorda  [[form of "heardan"?]]

heorðbacen _baked on the hearth_, Æ.

heorðcneoht m. _attendant_, CP 361^18.

heorðfæst _having a settled home_, LL 322´.

heorðgenêat ¶ m. _retainer_.

heorðpening m. _'hearth-penny,' tax (for the Church)_, _Peter's penny_,
_LL_ (v. 2·506).

heorðsw¯æpe f. _bridesmaid_, Cp 701#p#.

heorðwerod ¶ n. _body of retainers_.

heoru ¶ m. _sword_.

heorublâc _mortally wounded_, B 2488?

heorucumbul n. _standard_, #El# 107.

heorudolg n. _deadly wound_, #An# 944.

heorudrêor ¶ m. _sword-blood, gore_.

heorudrêorig ¶ _blood-stained_: _dejected, crest-fallen_.

heorudrync m. _sword-drink, blood shed by the sword_, B 2358.

heorufæðm m. _deadly grasp_, #Ex# 504.

heoruflâ f. _arrow_, #LPs# 56^5.

heorugîfre ¶ _fierce, greedy for slaughter_.

heorugr¯ædig ¶ _bloodthirsty_.

heorugrimm ¶ _savage, fierce_.

heoruhôciht _with formidable hooks, savagely barbed_, B 1438.

heorung = herung

heoruscearp _very sharp_, #Rd# 6^8.

heorusceorp n. _war equipments_, #Hell# 73.

heoruserce ¶ f. _coat of mail_.

heoruswealwe f. _falcon, hawk_, #Wy# 186.

heorusweng ¶ m. _sword-stroke_.

heorut = heorot

heoruw¯æpen n. _sword_, #Jud# 263.

heoruweallende § _gushing with destruction_.

heoruwearg m. _bloodthirsty wolf_, B 1267.

heoruword n. _hostile speech_, FT 84.

heoruwulf m. _warrior_, #Ex# 181.

hêow I. pret. 3 sg. of hêawan. II. = hîw

hêow- = hîw-

hêowan = hêofan

heplic = hæplic  [[only in form "hæplicnes"]]

her- = hear-, hier-

hêr I. adv. _'here,' in this place_, _Æ, G, VPs_: _in this world_, _Bl,
LL_: _at this point of time, at this date, now_, _Chr, Ct_: _towards
this place, hither_, _B_. II. = h¯ær

hêr- = h¯ær-, hîer-, hýr-

hêræfter (ý) adv. _'hereafter,' later on_, _A, BH_.

hêrbeforan adv. _before, previously_, W 52^11; FM 361^23.

hêr-beufan, -biufan adv. _here above, previously_, CP.

hêrbûende ¶ mp. _here-dwellers, dwellers on earth_.

herbyrg == herebeorg

hercnian = heorcnian

hêrcyme m. _coming here, advent_, #Cr# 250.

herd = heord

herd- = hierd-

hêrd- = hîerd-

here (obl. cases usu. have herg-, herig-) m. _predatory band, troop,
army, host, multitude_, _Chr, Mt_; AO, CP ('se h.' almost always = _the
Danish army_ in #Chr#): _battle, war, devastation_. ['_here_'; _Ger._
heer]

hêre I. f. _dignity, majesty, importance_. II. (#VPs#) = h¯ære

here-bêacen, -bêacn n. _military ensign, standard_: _beacon,
lighthouse_.

here-beorg, -byrg f. _lodgings, quarters_, NC 346. [_Ger._ herberge]

herebeorgian _to take up one's quarters, lodge_, #Chr# 1048#f#. [_Ger._
herbergen]

hereblêað _cowardly_, #Ex# 453.

herebrôga m. _dread of war_, B 462.

herebýme f. _trumpet, sackbut_.

herebyrgian = herebeorgian

herebyrne f. _corslet_, B 1443.

herecirm m. _war cry_, #Gu# 872.

herecist = herecyst

herecombol n. _standard_, #El# 25?

herecyst ¶ f. _warlike band_.

+heredlic (#LPs# 105^2) = +hierendlic  [[headword spelled "hîerendlic"]]

herefeld ¶ m. _battle-field, field_.

herefeoh n. _booty_, AO 118^5.

herefêða m. _war-troop_, #Cr# 1013.

hereflýma (ê) § m. _fugitive from battle, deserter_.

herefolc ¶ n. _army_.

herefong m. _osprey_, WW.

herefugol m. _bird of prey, vulture, eagle_, #Ex# 161.

hereg- = herg-, herig-

heregang m. _incursion_, W 312^1.

here-geat fn. gp. -geat(w)e, -geat(w)a, -geatu _war-gear, military
equipment_, _Bo, Ma_: '_heriot_,' _Ct, LL_ (v. 2·500).

heregeatland n. _heriot-land_, LL 220.

heregild (e, eo, y) n. _war-tax, Danegeld_, _Chr, Ct_. ['_heregeld_']

heregrîma ¶ m. _helmet_.

herehand f. _violence of war_, BH 356^22.

herehlôð f. _war-host, troop_, #Gu# 1042.

here-hûð, -hýð f. _booty, prey, plunder_, Æ, AO.

herelâf f. _remains of host_, Æ: _spoil_, Æ.

herelic _martial_, WW 374^26.

herelof mn. _fame, glory_, OEG.

heremæcg m. _warrior_, #Gen# 2483.

heremægen ¶ n. _warlike force, multitude_.

heremann m. _soldier_, LkL 7^8.

hêremann = hîeremann  [[headword spelled "hîereman"]]

heremeðel n. _national assembly_, #El# 550.

herenes (æ) f. _praise_.

herenett n. _corslet_, B 1553.

herenîð m. _warfare_, B 2474.

herepâd ¶ f. _corslet, coat of mail_.

her(e)-pað, -pæð m. _military road, highway_, v. CC 46 and Mdf.

herer¯æs m. _hostile raid_, W 271^2.

herer¯æswa ¶ m. _commander_.

hererêaf f. _war spoil, plunder, booty_, Æ.

hererinc ¶ m. _warrior_.

heresceaft m. _spear_, B 335.

heresceorp n. _war-dress_, #Fin# 45.

heresîð ¶ m. _warlike expedition_.

herespêd f. _success in war_, B 64.

hêrespel n. _discourse_, #Creat# 77.

herestr¯æl m. _arrow_, B 1435.

herestr¯æt f. _highway, main road_, CP 375^9 and #n# (LL 556, 10, 2).

hereswêg m. _martial sound_, #Ruin# 23.

heresyrce f. _corslet_, B 1511.

heretêam m. _plunder, devastation_: _predatory excursion_.

here-têma, -týma m. _army leader, general, king, ruler_.

here-toga, -toha m. _commander, general, chieftain_, _Æ, BH_; AO, CP.
['_heretoga_'; _Ger._ herzog]

hereðrêat ¶ m. _war-band, troop_.

hereðrym m. _phalanx_, WW 411^34.

herew¯æd f. _mail, armour_, B 1897.

herew¯æpen n. _weapon_, #PPs# 34^3.

herewæsma m. _prowess_, B 677.

herew¯æða ¶ m. _warrior_.

hereweg m. _highway_, WW 146^33.

hereweorc n. _war-work_, #El# 656.

herewian = hierwan

herewîc n. _dwellings, camp_, #Bl#.

herewîsa ¶ m. _captain, general_.

herewôp m. _the cry of an army_, #Ex# 460.

hereword n. _praise, renown_, #Chr# 1009#f#.

herewôsa ¶ m. _warrior_.

herewulf m. _warrior_, #Gen# 2015.

herewurd (#HGl# 423) = hereword

herfest = hærfest

herg = hearg

herg- = herg-, hereg-, heri(g)-

hergað m. _harrying, plundering, devastation_.

hergere m. _one who praises_, _DR_. ['_heryer_']

±hergian _to ravage, plunder, lay waste, 'harry,'_ _AO, Chr_; Æ, CP.
['_harrow_'; here]

hergoð = hergað

hergung (AO), hergiung f. _'harrying,' ravaging, raid, invasion,
attack_, _BH, Chr_: _plunder, booty_: '_harrowing_,' _Æ_.

herh = hearg

herian I. _to extol, praise, commend_, _Æ, AO, CP, VPs_ (æ). ['_hery_']
II. = hierwan. III. = hergian. IV. = erian

herig == hearg; v. also here.

herigendlic _laudable, commendable_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

hering = herung

hêrinne adv. '_herein_,' _Æ_.

herlic = herelic

hêrof adv. _'hereof,' of this_, _A_.

hêron adv. _herein_, _Ct_; LL. ['_hereon_']

hêrongean adv. _contrarily, in opposition_, W 52^8.

hêrongemong _at this point, in this connection, meanwhile_, CP: _among
others_, CP.

her-pað, -poð = herepað

hêrra = hêarra, hîerra (v. hêah)

herst- = hierst-

hêrsum == hîersum

hêrtô _thus far_, OEG 56^80.

hêrtôêacan _besides_, W.

herð = heorð

herðan pl. '_testiculi_,' LL 84[65].

herðbelig m. '_scrotum_,' WW.

herðland (NC 357) = yrðland

herung (eo) f. _praise_, _Æ, CP_. ['_herying_']

herutbeg (OEG 54^2) = heorotberge

herw- = hierw-, hirw-

herwið adv. '_herewith_,' _EC_ 236.

hes- = hys-

hêst = h¯æst

hêt pret. 3 sg. of hâtan.

hetan _to attack_, ÆL 35^280.

hete (ea) m. _'hate,' envy, malice, hostility, persecution_, _B, BH,
VPs_; Æ, AO, CP.

hetegrim ¶ _fierce, cruel_.

hetel == hetol

hetelic _hostile, malignant, horrible, violent, excessive_, _AO, B_.
['_hatelich_'] adv. -lîce, _Æ_. ['_hately_']

hetend = hettend

hetenîð ¶ m. _hostility, spite, wickedness_.

heterôf _full of hate_, #An# 1422.

heterûn f. _charm which produces hate_, #Rd# 34^7.

hetespr¯æc f. _defiant speech_, #Gen# 263.

hetesweng m. _hostile blow_, B 2225.

heteðanc ¶ m. _hostile design_.

heteðoncol _hostile_, #Jul# 105.

hetol _hating, hostile, evil_, Æ, W: _violent, severe_, RB 67^16.

hetolnes (e^2) f. _fierceness_, OEG 11^152.

hêton pret. pl. of hâtan.

hêtt (AO) = h¯æt pres. 3 sg. of hâtan.

hettend ¶ m. _enemy, antagonist_.

hettende pres. part. of hatian.

hêðen = h¯æðen

hêwen = h¯æwen

hî = hêo, hîe

hicemâse f. _blue titmouse_, WW 132^24.

hicgan = hycgan

hicol m. _woodpecker_, BC 1·47 (Mdf).

hîd I. fn. _a 'hide' of land (about 120 acres, but amount varied
greatly)_, _BH, LL_, v. EC pp 457-461 and LL 2·513. [hîwan] II. = hýd

hîdan = hýdan

hidenofer adv. _hither_.

hider adv. _'hither,' to this side, on this side_, _Æ, Cp, VPs_. comp.
hideror _nearer_. h. and ðider (_Cp, CP_), hidres ðidres (ðædres), _Bo_,
_hither and thither_.

hidercyme m. _advent, arrival_, _BH_. ['_hithercome_']

hidergeond adv. _thither, yonder_.

hiderryne adj. _directed hither_.

hidertôcyme = hidercyme

hiderweard adj. and adv. _'hitherward,' towards this place_, _Chr_.

hîdgild I. n. _tax paid on each hide of land_, _Ct_. ['_hidegeld_'] II.
= hýdgild

hidir- = hider-

hîdm¯ælum adv. _by hides_, KC 6·98^4.

hidres v. hider.

hîe I. nap. of hê, hêo, hit. ['_hi, hy_'] II. = hêo nasf. of hê.
['_hi, hy_']

hieder = hider

hîeg (ê, î) n. _'hay,' cut grass_, _G, Lcd, VPs_. [hêawan]

hîeghûs (ê, î) n. _hay store_, _WW_. ['_hay-house_']

hîegian (CP) = hîgian

hîegsîðe (ê) m. _hay-scythe_, GD 37^13.

hîehra, hîehst ['_highest_'] v. hêah.

hîehðu (ê, êa, ý) f. (often indecl.) _'height,' highest point, summit_,
_Sc_: _the heavens, heaven_, _Cr, El, Gu, Sc_: _glory_. [hêah]

±hield (æ, ea, eo, i, y) f. (usu. +) _keeping, custody, guard,
protection_, CP: _observance, observation, watching_: _secret place_:
_protector, guardian_.

±hieldan (e, y) intr. _to lean, incline, slope_, _Bo_ (e): tr. _force
downwards, bow or bend down_, _B, Lk_ (y). ['_hield_']

-hielde (y) v. earfoð-h.  [[under "earfoðhylde"]]

hielf (e, y) m. _handle_, _CP, WW_. ['_helve_']

hielfling (e) m. _mite, farthing_, LkL 12^6. [healf]

hiellan _to make a noise_, #EPs# 82^3.

hielpeð pres. 3 sg. of helpan.

hielt pres. 3 sg. of healdan.

-hieltan (y) v. â-h. [healt]  [[under "âhyltan"]]

hielto f. _lameness_, MH 116^10 (e, y).

±hîenan (¯æ, ê, ý) _to fell, prostrate_: _weaken, crush, afflict, injure,
oppress_: _abase, humble, insult_, _B, LkL_: (+) _accuse, condemn_, CP.
['_hean_']

hiene as. of hê. ['_hin_']

+hîene (ê) _ready to fall_, DR 189^16.

hîenend (e^1) m. _accuser_, JnL p5^9.

hîenðo (¯æ, ê, ý) f. _humiliation, affliction, oppression, annoyance_,
CP: _loss, damage, harm_: _act of hanging_, DHy 59^7.

hiera gp. of hê, hêo, hit. ['_her_']

hîera = hîerra v. hêah.

±hîeran (ê, êo, î, ý) tr. and intr. _to 'hear,' listen (to)_, _B, Mt,
Jul, VPs_: (w. d.) _obey, follow_, _Æ, Mk_; CP: _accede to, grant_,
_Bl_: _be subject to, belong to_, _A, AO, B, Ct_.

±hierdan (i, y) _to harden, make hard_: _strengthen, fortify, confirm,
encourage_, CP. [heard]

hierde (eo, i, y) m. _shepherd, herdsman_, _CP, G_: _guardian, keeper_,
_B, Bl, Gen, Met, WW_: _pastor_. ['_herd_']

hierdebôc f. _pastoral book_ (translation of the _Cura Pastoralis_ of
Pope Gregory), CP.

hierdebelig (e) m. _shepherd's bag_, #Bl# 31^17.

hierdecnapa (y) m. _shepherd boy_, ÆL 23^418.

hierdelêas (i, y) _without a shepherd or pastor_, _Æ_. ['_herdless_']

hierdelic (y) _pastoral_, CP.

hierdeman m. _shepherd_, _Æ_ (y). ['_herdsman_']

hierdewyrt (i) f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd#.

±hierdnes (eo, i, y) f. _custody, watch, guard_.

hierdung (y) f. _strengthening, restoring_, WW 150^34.

hiere gds. of hêo. ['_her_']

hîered = hîred

hîereman (ê, î, ý) m. _retainer, servant, subject, hearer, parishioner_,
CP. [hîeran]

+hîerend m. _hearer_, CP.

+hîerendlic '_auditus_,' #LPs# 142^8 (ê^1); '_audiendus_,' #ÆGr#
152^6 (ý).

+hîering (ê) f. _hearing, hearsay_, #LPs# 111^7.

hîeringman (e^1) m. _subject_, A 11·377^149.

hîernes (ê, ý) f. (+) _hearing, report_: (±) _obedience, subjection,
allegiance_, CP: _jurisdiction, district_.

hierra = hearra

hîerra v. hêah. ['_higher_']

±hierstan (e, i, y) _to fry, roast, scorch, pain_, CP. [cp. _OHG._
giharsten]

hierste (e, y) f. hierstepanne (ea, y) f. _frying-pan_, CP.

hiersting (y) f. _frying, burning_, CP.

hierstinghlâf (e) m. _crust_, WW 372^18.

±hîersum (ê, êa, î, ý) w. d. _obedient, docile_, _BH_ (ý), _Gu_ (êa).
['_hearsum_']

±hîersumian (i, y) w. d. _to obey, serve_, _BH_ (êa), _Mt_ (ý); AO: (+)
_reduce, subject, conquer_, #Chr#. ['_hearsum_']

±hîersumnes (î, ý) f. _obedience, submission_, _BH_ (ý); CP.
['_hersumnesse_']

±hiertan (e, eo, y) _to cheer, encourage_, _CP_; Æ. ['_heart_'; heort]

±hierwan (e, i, y) _to abuse, blaspheme, condemn, illtreat_: _to deride,
despise_.

hierwend (i) m. _blasphemer_.

hierwendlic _contemptible_. adv. -lîce (e) _with contempt_.

hierwing (y) f. _blasphemy_, #Sc# 137^12.

hierwnes (i, y) f. _contempt, reproach_: _blasphemy_, W 70^12.

hîew == hîw

hîewestân m. _hewn stone_, AO 212^10.

hîewet (ý) n. _cutting_, CP. [hêawan]

hîewian = hîwian

hîewð (CP) pres. 3 sg. of hêawan.

hîf- (v. OEG 3913) = hîw-

hig = hîe I.

hîg == hîeg

hîgan = hîwan

hige == hyge

hîgendlîce _quickly, immediately_, MF (Vesp. D xiv). [hîgian]

higera m., higere f. _jay, magpie, jackdaw, woodpecker_. [_Ger._ häher]

higgan = hycgan

hîgian _to 'hie,' exert oneself, strive, hasten_, _Bl, Bo, CP_.

hîgid = hîd

hîglâ '_heu!_' #RPs# 119^5.

higlêast = hygelêast

hîgna v. hîwan.

hîgo (N) = hîwan

higora = higera

higre = higere  [[under "higera"]]

hîgscipe = hîwscipe

hîgð f. _exertion, effort_, _ZDA_. ['_hight_']

hîgung f. _effort_, GD 254^34.

hihsan = hyscan

hiht == hyht

hihting f. _exultation, gladness_, WW 233^42.

hîhðo = hîehðu

hilc = hylc

hild I. ¶ f. _war, battle, combat_. II. = hield, hyldo

hildbedd n. _deathbed_, #An# 1094.

hildebill ¶ n. _sword_.

hildeblâc _deadly pale_, B 2488.

hildebord ¶ n. _buckler_.

hildecalla m. _war-herald_, #Ex# 252.

hildecorðor n. _warlike band_, #Ap# 41.

hildecyst f. _valour_, B 2598.

hildedêoful n. _demon_, #PPs# 95^5.

hildedêor _war-fierce, brave_, Æ.

hildefreca ¶ m. _warrior_.

hildefrôfor f. _war-help, sword_? _shield_? #Wald# 2^12.

hildegeatwe ¶ fp. _war-harness_.

hildegesa m. _terror of battle_, #El# 113.

hildegicel m. _battle-icicle (blood dripping from a sword)_, B 1606.

hildegiest m. _enemy_, #Rd# 54^9.

hildegrædig ¶ _eager for battle_.

hildegrâp ¶ f. _hostile grip_.

hildeheard _bold in battle_, #Ap# 21.

hildehlem ¶ m. _crash of battle_.

hildelêoma ¶ m. _Gleam of battle_ (name of a sword), B.

hildelêoð n. _war-song_, #Jud# 211.

hildemêce m. _sword_, B 2202.

hildemecg m. _warrior_, B 799.

hilden¯ædre ¶ f. _war-snake, arrow_.

hildepîl ¶ m. _dart, javelin_.

hilder¯æs m. _charge, attack_, B 300.

hilderand m. _shield_, B 1242.

hilderinc ¶ m. _warrior, hero_.

hildesæd _battle-worn_, B 2723.

hildesceorp n. _armour_, B 2155.

hildescûr m. _shower of darts_, #Gu# 1116.

hildeserce f. _corslet_, #El# 234.

hildesetl m. _saddle_, B 1039.

hildespell n. _warlike speech_, #Ex# 573.

hildestrengo f. _vigour for battle_, B 2113.

hildeswât m. _vapour of battle_? B 2558.

hildeswêg m. _sound of battle_, #Gen# 1991.

hildetorht _shining in battle_, #Met# 25^9.

hildetux m. _tusk (as weapon)_, B 1511.

hildeðremma m. _warrior_, #Jul# 64.

hildeðrymm § m., hildeðrýð § f., _warlike strength, valour_.

hildew¯æpen m. _weapon of war_, B 39.

hildewîsa m. _commander_, B 1064.

hildewôma ¶ m. _crash of battle_.

hildewr¯æsn f. _fetter for captives_, #Sol# 292.

hildewulf m. _hero_, #Gen# 2051.

hildfreca = hildefreca

hildfrom _valiant in war_, #An# 1204.

hildfruma ¶ m. _battle-chief, prince, emperor_.

hildlata ¶ m. _laggard in battle, coward_.

hildstapa m. _warrior_, #An# 1260.

hildðracu f. _onset of battle_, #Gen# 2157.

hileð = hilð

hilhâma = hyllehâma

hill = hyll, hell

hilman _helmet, cover_, #Gl#. [helm]

+hilman = helmian

hilpestu = hilpest ðu (pres. 2 sg. of helpan and pron. 2 pers. sing.)

hilpeð, hilpð pres. 3 sg. of helpan.

hilt I. pres. 3 sg. of healdan. II. mn. = hilte

hilte fn. _handle, 'hilt' (of sword)_, _B, WW_; (pl. = sg.) _Æ, B, Sol_.

hiltecumbor n. _banner with a staff_, B 1022 (or ? hilde-).

hilted _'hilted,' with a hilt_, _B_.

hilting m. _sword_, OEG 758.

hiltlêas _having no hilt_, WW 142^34.

±hiltu np. (as sg.) _hilt_.

hilð pres. 3 sg. of helan.

him ds. of hê, dp. of hê, hêo, hit. ['_him_']

himming (Cp 1557) = hemming

hîna v. hîwan.

hinan = heonan  [[under "heona"]]

hînan = hîenan

-hinca v. helle-h.

hind (y) f. _'hind,' (female deer)_, _Æ, Chr, WW_.

hindan _from behind, behind, in the rear_, Æ, AO. æt h. _behind_, Æ.
[_Ger._ hinten]

hindanweard § adv. _hindwards, at the end_.

hindberge f. _raspberry_, _Cp, Ep, Lcd_. ['_hindberry_']

hindbrêr m. _raspberry bush_, #Lcd# 146b (hinde-).

hindcealf mn. _fawn_, _WW_. ['_hindcalf_']

hindema ¶ superl. adj. _hindmost, last_.

hinder adj. _after (thought)_, _sad (thought)_, MF (Vesp. D xiv): adv.
_behind, back, after, in the farthest part, down_. on h. _backwards_, Æ.
[_Ger._ hinter]

hindergêap _wily, cunning, deceitful_, _WW_. ['_hinderyeap_']

hindergenga m. _one who walks backwards_, OEG 26^23: _apostate_, OEG
5^16.

hinderhôc m. _trick_, #Mod# 34.

hinderling I. m. _mean wretch, sneak_, LL 665´. II. adv. in phr. 'on
hinderling' _backwards_, _PPs_. ['_hinderling_']

hindernes f. _wickedness, guile_, NC 301; MF 166.

hinderscipe m. _wickedness_, DHy, OEG.

hinderðêostru np. _nether darkness_, #PPs# 85^12.

hinderweard _backward, slow_.

hindeweard _reversed, wrong end first, from behind_, CP.

hindfalod n. _hind-fold_, KC 6·112^31.

hind-hæleðe, -heoloð(e) f. _'ambrosia,' water agrimony_, _WW_.
[v. '_hindheal_']

±hindrian _to 'hinder,' check, repress_, _Chr, LL_.

hindsîð (#Bl#) = hinsîð

hine I. as. of hê. II. = heonan  [[under "heona"]]

hîne = hîwene  [[form of "hîwen"?]]

hinfûs ¶ _ready to depart or die_.

hingang ¶ m. _departure, death_.

hingrian (_Bl_; Æ) = hyngrian  [[under "hyngran"]]

hinn- = hin-

hinon = heonan  [[under "heona"]]

hinsîð ¶ m. _departure, death_. [heonan]  [[under "heona"]]

hinsîðgryre m. _fear of death_, #Sat# 456.

hîo v. hê.

hio- = heo-

hionne? f. '_dura mater_,' LL 5[36].

hior = heorr

hîored = hîred

hîowesclîce = hîwisclîce  [[form of "hîwisc"]]

hip- = hyp-

hipsful (OEG 11^180) = hyspful

hîr = hýr

hir- = hier-

hîr- = hêor-, hîer-

hira gp. of hê, hêo, hit.

hire gds. of hêo. ['_her_']

hîred (êo, îe, ý) m. _household, family, retinue_, _AO, Bo, Mt, WW_:
_brotherhood, company_, _Æ, Ct_. ['_hird_']

hîredcniht m. _member of a household_, _Æ_.

hîredcûð _domestic, familiar_, #Sc# 203^13.

hîredgerêfa m. '_ex-consul_,' WW 110^6.

hîredlic _pertaining to a household or court, domestic, familiar_.

hîredman m. _retainer, follower_, _Æ, Ma_. ['_hirdman_']

hîredprêost m. _chaplain_, EC 255.

hîredwîfman m. _female member of a household_, TC 531^6.

hîredwist f. _familiarity_, #Sc# 203^12.

his gs. of hê. ['_his_']

hîs (BH) = îs

hîsc- = hýsc-

hispan = hyspan

hisse = hyse

hit v. hê. ['_it_']

hittan (y) _to fall in with, meet with_, _'hit' upon_, _Chr_ 1066.
[_ON._ hitta]

hîð- = hyð-

hiðer = hider

hiu (_NG_) = hêo

hîw (êo, îe, ý) n. _appearance, form, species, kind_, _Æ, Bl, WW_:
_apparition_, _WW_ 236^8: _'hue,' colour_, _A, Bl_: _beauty_: _figure of
speech_.

hîwan mp. (gen. hîwna, hî(g)na) _members of a family, household or
religious house_, _Chr, G_; Æ. ['_hind_,' '_hewe_']

hîwbeorht ¶ _radiant, beautiful_.

hîwcund (hîl-) _familiar, domestic_.

hîwcûð (îe) _familiar, well-known_, Æ, CP.

hîwcûðlic _domestic_: _familiar_, GD 32. adv. -lîce _familiarly_.

+hîwcûðlician _to make known or familiar to_, NC 294.

hîwcûðnes f. _familiarity_, GD 71^24; 140^7.

hîwcûðr¯ædnes f. _familiarity_, WW 191^24.

hîwen n. _household_, _Æ_. ['_hewen_']

hîwere m. _dissembler, hypocrite_, Æ.

hîwfæger _comely of form_, MFH 167.

hîwfæst _comely, fair_, OEG.

hîwgedâl n. _divorce_, G.

±hîwian I. _to form, fashion_, _WW_: _colour_: _dissimulate, feign,
pretend_, _Æ_: _figure, signify_, Æ: (+) _transform, transfigure_.
['_hue_,' '_hued_'] II. _to marry_, CP 318^1.

hîwiend, hîwigend '_informator_,' OEG 365? '_meditator_,' GPH 390.

hîwisc n. _household_, Æ: _hide_ (_of land_ v. hîd). adv. -lîce
_familiarly_.

+hîwl¯æcan _to form, shape, fashion_, NC 294.

hîwlêas _shapeless_, _WW_: _colourless_, _Lcd_. ['_hueless_']

hîwlic _comely_, #Lcd#, OEG.

hîwna v. hîwan.

hîwr¯æden f. _family, household, religious house_, Æ.

hîwscipe m. _family, household_: _hide (of land)_, CC 127.

hîwð pres. 3 sg. of hêawan.

hîwung I. (êo, ý) f. (±) _appearance, likeness, form, figure_:
_pretence, hypocrisy_, Æ. II. f. _marriage_, AO 64^24.

hlacerian _to deride, mock_, #LPs# 24^3.

hlacerung f. _unseemly behaviour, or words_, #LPs# 43^14.

±hladan^6 (æ, ea) _to 'lade,' draw, or take in water_, _Æ, JnR_: _heap
up, lay on, build, load, burden_, _B, Gen, Rd_; CP.

hladung f. _drawing ('haustus')_, DHy 58^6.

hl¯æ = hl¯æw

hlæd n. _heap_? _burden_? _CP_ 21^160. ['_lade_']

hlædder (_Bl_), hlæddre = hl¯æder

hlæddisc m. _loaded dish_? WW 126^39.

hlædel m. '_ladle_,' _A, ZDA_.

hlæden I. m. _bucket_, WW 123^5. II. pp. of hladan.

hl¯æder f. '_ladder_,' _A, Æ_; CP.

hl¯æderwyrt f. _ladder-wort, Jacob's ladder_, #Lcd#.

hlædhweogl n. _water-wheel, wheel for drawing up water_, WW 347^7.

hlædst = hlætst pres. 2 sg. of hladan.

hlædtrendel m. _wheel for drawing water_, OEG 502.

hl¯æfdige (â, ê) f. _mistress (over servants)_, _LL, VPs_ (â), _WW_:
_chatelaine_, _'lady,' queen_, _Chr, Ct_: _the Virgin Mary_, _Cr_. sêo
ealde h. _the queen dowager_, #Chr# 1051#c#.

hlæfl = læfel

+hl¯æg n. _derision, scorn_, #Dom# 15.

hlægulian (Cp 317) = hlagolian

hlæhan (N, #VPs#) = hliehhan

hlæhter = hleahtor

hl¯ænan I. _to cause to lean_, #Jul# 63. II. = l¯ænan

-hl¯ænan v. â-hl.

hl¯æne '_lean_,' _Æ_; AO.

±hl¯ænian _to become lean_, _CP_: _make lean, starve_, _CP_. ['_lean_']

hl¯ænnes f. '_leanness_,' _Æ, OEG_.

±hl¯ænsian _to make lean, weaken_, OEG. ['_lense_']

hl¯æpewince (WW) = lêapewince  [[headword spelled "hlêapewince"]]

hlæst n. _burden, load, freight_, _B, Rd_. holmes h. _finny tribe_.
['_last_']

+hlæstan (e) _to load, burden_, _BH_: _adorn_, #Jud# 36.
[v. '_last_' vb.]

hlæsting f. _toll on loading a ship_, TC 359.

hlæstscip n. _trading-vessel_, Cp 147#h#.

hlæt = læt

hlætst pres. 2 sg. of hladan.

hl¯æw ¶ (â) mn. _mound, cairn, hill, mountain_, _B_: _grave-yard,
barrow_, _Met_: _hollow mound, cave_. ['_low_']

hlâf m. _'loaf,' bread, food_, _A, JnL, MtL_; Æ, AO, CP.

hlâf¯æta m. _('loaf-eater'), dependant_, _LL_.

hlâfbrytta m. _slave in charge of the bread-store_? EC 255.

hlâfdie (#VPs#) = hl¯æfdige

hlâfgang m. _attendance at, or participation in, a meal_, RB:
_procession with the host_, LL.

hlâf-gebrece §, -gebroc n. _bit of bread_.

hlâfhw¯æte m. _bread-wheat_, TC 144^34.

hlâflêast f. _want of bread_.

hlâfmæsse f. _'Lammas' (August 1)_, _AO_; Æ.

hlâfmæssedæg m. _Lammas-day_.

hlâfofn m. _baker's oven_, WW 411^8.

hlâford m. _'lord,' master, ruler_, _A, AO, B, Chr, G_; Æ, CP:
_husband_, _Ct_: _the Lord, God_, _Æ_. [hlâf, weard]

hlâforddôm m. _lordship, authority_, _CP_: _patronage_. ['_lorddom_']

hlâfordhyldo f. _loyalty_, AO.

hlâfording m. _lord, master_, W 298^7.

hlâfordlêas _without a lord, leaderless_, _B_. ['_lordless_']

hlâfordlic _'lordly,' noble_, _OEG_ 187^1.

hlâfordscipe m. _'lordship,' authority, rule_, _CP_: _'dominatio' (title
of an order of angels)_, _ÆH_ 1·342^32.

hlâfordsearu fn. _high treason_, LL.

hlâfordsôcn f. _act of seeking the protection of a lord_, LL.

hlâfordswica m. _traitor_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_lordswike_']

hlâfordswice m. _high treason, treachery_.

hlâford-swîcung (MFN 167; W 225^28), -syrwung (LL 16n5) f. _betrayal of
one's lord, treason_.

hlâfordðrimm m. _dominion, power_, NC 302.

hlâfræce f. _oven-rake_, OEG 53^43 (hlâb-).

hlâfsênung f. _blessing of bread (on Lammas-day)_, MH 136^1.

hlâfurd = hlâford

hlagol _inclined to laugh_, W 40^8.

hlagolian (æ) _to sound_.

hlâmmæsse = hlâfmæsse

hlanc _'lank,' lean, thin_, _Jud, PPs_.

hland (o) n. _urine_, _Lcd_. ['_lant_']

hlaðian = laðian

hlâw = hl¯æw

hleadan = hladan

hleahter = hleahtor

hleahterful _scornful_, #Guth#.

hleahterlic _ridiculous_, #Guth#.

hleahtor (e) m. _'laughter,' jubilation_, _B, Bl, CP, Sc_: _derision_.

hleahtorsmið m. _laughter-maker_, #Ex# 43.

hleahtrian (e) _to deride_, #LPs# 21^8.

hlêapan^7 _to 'leap,' run, go, jump, dance, spring_, _Æ, B, BH, Chr,
CP_: (+) _leap upon, mount (a horse)_.

hlêapere m. _runner, courier_, _Chr_: _'leaper,' dancer_, _WW_:
_itinerant monk_, RB 135^20.

hlêapestre f. _female dancer_, WW 311^33.

hlêapettan v. _to leap up_, BH 390^9.

hlêapewince f. '_lapwing_,' _WW_.

hlêapung f. _dancing_, _Æ_. ['_leaping_']

hlêat pret. 3 sg. of hlêotan.

hlec _leaky_, _CP, OEG_. [v. '_leak_']

hlecan^5 _to cohere_, CP 361^20.

hleda, hlede m. _seat_, #ÆGr# 34^3.

hlêf = hl¯æw

-hlêfan (oe) v. â-hl.

hlêga (_LkL_ 6^16) = l¯æwa

hlehhan = hliehhan

hleht- = hleaht-

hlem m. _sound_, CP.

hlemman _to cause to sound, clash_, #Whale# 61. [hlimman]

hlênan = l¯ænan

hlence f. _coat of mail_, #Ex# 218.

hlennan = hlynnan

hlenortêar m. _hyssop_, #LPs# 50^8.

hlêo ¶ m? n? (hlêow), gs. hlêowes (only found in sg.) _covering, refuge,
defence, shelter, protection_, _Cr, PPs_: _protector, lord_. ['_lee_']

hlêo- = hlêow-

hlêobord n. _book-cover_, #Rd# 27^12.

hlêoburh ¶ f. _protecting city_.

hlêod = hlôd

+hleodu pl. of +hlid.

hlêofæst _consoling, protecting_, #Cr#, RB.

hlêohræscnes f. '_supplantatio_'? #LPs# 40^10.

hlêolêas ¶ _without shelter, comfortless_.

hleomoc m? hleomoce f. _speedwell_, _Lcd_. [v. '_brooklime_']

hlêon = hlêowan

hleon- = hlin-

hlêonað m. _shelter_, #Gu# 222.

hlêonian _to thrive_, #Ph# 25.

hlêop pret. 3 sg. of hlêapan.

hlêor n. _cheek_, _Lcd, WW_: _face, countenance_, _Ep, Gu_. ['_leer_']

hlêoran (ÆL) = lêoran

hlêorbân n. _(cheek-bone), temple_, #LPs# 131^5.

hlêorbolster m. _pillow_, B 688.

hlêordropa m. _tear_, #Gu# 1315.

hlêorsceamu f. _confusion of face_, #PPs# 68^8.

hlêorslæge m. _a blow on the cheek_, CP 261^6.

hlêortorht _beautiful_, #Rd# 69^6.

hlêosceorp n. _sheltering robe_, #Rd# 10^5.

hlêotan^1 _to cast lots_, Æ, AO: (±) _get by lot, obtain_.

hlêoð = (1) hlêowð; (2) pres. pl. of hlêowan.

hlêoðor n. _noise, sound, voice, melody, song_: _hearing_.

+hlêoðor _harmonious_, BH 60^18.

hlêoðorcwide ¶ m. _speaking, words, discourse, song, prophecy_.

hlêoðorcyme m. _coming with trumpet-sound_, #Da# 710.

hlêoðorstede § m. _place of conference_.

hlêoðrian _to sound, speak, sing, cry aloud, resound, proclaim_, Æ.

hlêoðrung f. _reproof_, #SPs# 37^11.

hleoðu v. hlið.

hlêow == hlêo

+hlêow I. _warm, sunny_, _Nar_. adv. hlêowe _Lcd_. [v. '_lew_'] II. =
+hlôw

±hlêowan (î, ý) (±) _to warm, make warm, cherish_, _Bl_: _become warm or
hot_. ['_lew_']

hlêowdryhten m. _protector, patron_, #Wid# 94.

hlêowfeðre fp. _sheltering wings_, #Gen# 2740.

hlêowlora m. _one who has lost a protector_, #Gen# 1953.

hlêowm¯æg ¶ m. _kinsman who is bound to afford protection_.

hlêowon pret. pl. of hlôwan.

hlêowstede m. _sunny place_, WW 336^50.

hlêowstôl m. _shelter, asylum_, #Gen# 2011.

hlêowð (î, ý) f. _shelter, covering, warmth_, _Æ_. ['_lewth_']

±hlêowung (î) f. _shelter, protection, favour_.

hlestan = hlæstan, hlystan

hlet (#KGl#) pres. 3 sg. of hladan.

hlêt (#VPs#; MkR) = hlîet

+hlêða ¶ m. _companion, denizen_. [hlôð]

hlêðrian = hlêoðrian

hlêw = hl¯æw

hlêwesa = lêwsa

hlêwð pres. 3 sg. of hlôwan.

hlid I. n. _'lid,' covering, door, gate, opening_, _Æ_. II. = hlið

+hlid n. (nap. hlidu, hleodu) _covering, vault, roof_.

hlîdan^1 _to come forth, spring up_, #PPs# 79^11?

hlidfæst _closed by a lid_, Æ.

hlidgeat n. _swing-gate, folding-door_, _EC_; Æ; Mdf. ['_lidgate_']

+hlidod (eo) _provided with a lid_, _BH_ 320^10. ['_lidded_']

hliehhan^6 (e, i, y) _to laugh_, _Æ, CP_: (±) _laugh at, deride_, _Æ,
MtL_: _rejoice_. ['_laugh_']

hlîep (ý) mf., hlîepe f. _'leap,' bound, spring, sudden movement_, _Cr,
Lcd_: _thing to leap from_, AO: (?) v. CC 54.

-hlîepe v. stæð-hl.  [[headword spelled "stæðhlýpe"]]

-hlîeplîce v. stæð-hl.  [[headword spelled "stæðhlýplîce"]]

hlîepen pres. pl. of hlêapan.

hlîepgeat (ý) n. _a low gate_, _KC_. ['_leapgate_']

hlîet (ê) m. _lot, chance, fortune_, CP.

hlîfend (hlîb-) _threatening_, Cp 223#m#.

hlîfian _to rise high, tower, overhang_.

hlîgan^{1?} _to attribute (to)_, CP, #Da#.

hligsa (CP) = hlîsa

hlihan, hlihcan, hlihhan = hliehhan

hlimman^3 (y) _to sound, resound, roar, rage_.

hlimme ¶ f. _stream, torrent_.

hlin I. m. _maple-tree_, #Rd# 56^9. [_Ger._ lehne] II. = hlynn

hlinbedd n. _sick-bed, couch_, B 3034.

hlinc m. _ridge, bank, rising ground, hill_, _EC, Ph_; Mdf. ['_link_']

hlincr¯æw f. _bank of turf_, EC 370.

hlinduru ¶ f. _latticed door_.

±hlinian (eo, y) _to 'lean,'_ _B_ (eo); Æ: _recline, lie down, rest_,
_Jn, MkL_; CP.

hlinræced ¶ n. _prison_.

hlin-scûa ¶, -scuwa ¶ m. _darkness of confinement_.

hlinsian = hlynsian

hlinung f. '_leaning_,' _Lk_: _seat, couch_.

hlîosa = hlîsa

hlîpð pres. 3 sg. of hlêapan.

hlîra = lîra

hlîsa (îo, ý) m. _sound_: _fame, rumour, renown, glory_, CP.

hlîsb¯ære _renowned_, OEG.

hlîsêadig _renowned, famed_, #Bo#.

hlîsêadignes f. _renown_, #Bo# 75^28.

hlîsful _of good repute, famous_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ, AO.

hlîsig _renowned_, OEG 8^250.

hlistan = hlystan

hlið I. ¶ n. (nap. hleoðu) _cliff, precipice, slope, hill-side, hill_,
_An, B_; Mdf. ['_lith_'] II. == hlid

hlîw == hlêow

hloccetung f. _sighing_.

hlôd pret. 3 sg. of haldan.

hlodd = hlot

hlôgon pret. pl., hlôh pret. 3 sg. of hliehhan.

hlom (WW 117^25), hlond = hland

hlôse f. _pigsty_, LL 454[10]; NC 302; Mdf.

hlosnere m. _listener_, OEG 2333.

hlosnian _to listen_: _wait_, Æ: _be on the look out for, spy_, Æ.
hlosniend '_attonitus_.'

hlot, hlott n. _'lot,' part, portion, share_, _Æ, BC, Bl, G_: (+)
_choice, decision_, Æ, AO.

hloten pp. of hleotan.  [[headword spelled "hlêotan"]]

+hlotland n. _allotted land, inheritance_, Æ.

hlôð f. _troop, crowd, band, company_, AO: _booty, spoil_: _complicity
with a band of robbers_.

hlôðbôt f. _penalty imposed on a member of a gang of malefactors_, LL.

hlôðere m. _robber_. [hlôð]

hlôðgecrod n. _mass of troops_, #Rd# 4^63.

hlôðian _to spoil, plunder_, BH.

hlôðsliht m. _murder by a member of a gang of malefactors_, LL 18[29].

+hlôw n. _lowing, bellowing_, Æ.

hlôwan^7 _to low, roar, bellow_, Æ.

hlôwung f. _lowing, bleating, bellowing_, WW 192^7; 195^13.

hlûd adj. comp. hlûdre, hluddre _'loud,' sonorous_, _CP_; Æ.

hlûdclipol _loud, noisy_, RBL 35^11 (hlût-).

hluddre v. hlûd.

hlûde adv. _loudly, aloud_, _Bl_; Æ, CP. ['_loud_']

hlûdnes f. _clamour, noise_, _A_ 8·332. ['_loudness_']

hlûdstefne _loud sounding_, WW 416^18.

hlûdswêge adv. _loudly_, Æ.

hlummon pret. pl. of hlimman.

hlupon pret. pl. of hlêapan.

hluton pret. pl. of hlêotan.

hlûtor, hlûttor (e^2) gsm. hlûtres _pure, clear, bright, sincere_, Æ,
CP. [_Ger._ lauter] adv. -lîce.

hlûtorlicnes = hlûtornes

hlûtornes f. _clearness, brightness, simplicity, purity_, Æ.

hlûtre I. adv. _clearly, brightly_. II. ds. of hlûtor.

hlûtter, hlûttor = hlûtor

±hlûttrian wv. _to clear, purify, make bright_: _to become clear_.

hlyd = hlid

±hlýd f. _noise, sound_: (+) _tumult, disturbance, dissension_. [hlûd]

Hlýda m. _March_, _Lcd_. ['_Lide_'; hlûd]

hlýdan _to make a noise, sound, clamour, vociferate_, Æ, CP. [hlûd]

hlýde f. _torrent_, BC (Mdf).

hlýdig _garrulous_, OEG 1418. [hlûd]

hlýding f. _noise, cry_, MtL 25^6 (lý-).

hlyhhan = hliehhan

hlymman = hlimman

hlyn = hlynn

hlynian = (1) hlynnan; (2) hlinian

±hlynn I. m. _sound, noise, din, tumult_, AO. II. f. _torrent_, _JnL_.
['_linn_']

hlynnan _to make a noise, resound, shout, roar_.

hlynrian _to thunder_, WW 519^34.

hlynsian ¶ (i) _to resound_.

hlýp == hlîep

hlýsa (Æ) = hlîsa

hlýsfullîce = hlîsfullîce  [[form of "hlîsful"]]

hlysnan _to 'listen,'_ _MtL_; Cp.

hlysnere m. _hearer_, DR 29^4 (ly-).

±hlyst f. _sense of hearing_, _Æ, Lcd_: _listening_. ['_list_']

±hlystan (e, i) _to listen, hear_, _CP_; Æ: _attend to, obey_, _Lk_.
['_list_']

+hlyste _audible_, NC 294.

hlystend, hlystere m. _listener_, Æ.

+hlystful _attentive, gracious_, #LPs# 89^13.

hlystung f. _act of listening_, #Kl#.

hlýt, hlýte m. _lot, portion_, Æ: _band, troop_.

hlyta = hlytta

+hlyta m. _companion_. [hlot]

hlýtere m. _clergyman, priest_, NC 302.

hlytm m. _casting of lots_, B 3126?

hlytman _to decide by lot_, MFH 167.

hlytta m. _diviner, soothsayer_, AO 184^26. [hlot]

+hlytto _fellowship_, DR.

hlyttor (#HGl# 418) = hluttor, hlûtor

hlýttrian _to purify_, #ÆGr# 222^7.

hlýttrung f. _cleaning, refining_, WW 179^36.

-hlýðan (= îe) v. be-hl.

hlýðre = lýðre

hlýw- = hlêow-

hlýwing = hlêowung

hnacod = nacod

hn¯æcan = n¯æcan

±hn¯ægan I. _to bow down, bend, humble, curb, vanquish_. [hnîgan] II. _to
'neigh,'_ _ÆGr_. III. = n¯ægan

hn¯ægung f. '_neighing_,' _ÆGr, Cp_.

hnæpp m. _bowl_, _OEG, WW_. ['_nap_'; _Ger._ napf]

hnæpp- = hnapp-

hnæppan _to strike_, #Bo# 130^19,20.

hnæsce = hnesce

+hn¯æst, +hnâst n. _collision, conflict, battle_. [hnîtan]

hnâg, hnâh I. _bent down, abject, poor, humble, lowly_: _niggardly_. II.
pret. 3 sg. of hnîgan.

hnappian (æ, e, ea) _to doze, slumber, sleep_, _CP, Mt_; Æ. ['_nap_']

hnappung (æ, ea) f. _napping, dozing, slumbering_, CP.

hnât pret. 3 sg. of hnîtan.

hneap- (#VPs#) = hnap-

hnêaw _mean, niggardly, stingy, miserly_, CP. [_Ger._ genau] adv. -lîce.

hnêawnes f. _meanness_, CP.

hnecca m. '_neck_,' _Æ, CP_.

hnêgan = (1) n¯ægan; (2) hn¯ægan

hneofule f. = hnifol

-hnêopan v. â-h. [cp. _Goth._ dishniupan]

hneoton pret. pl. of hnîtan.

hnep (GD 186^27) = hnæpp

hneppian (#KGl#) = hnappian

hnesce (æ, i, y) _soft, tender, mild_, _CP_: _weak, delicate_, _Æ_:
_slack, negligent_, _CP_: _effeminate, wanton_, _Æ_. ['_nesh_']

±hnescian _to make soft, soften_, _Æ, CPs_: _become soft, give way,
waver_, _CP, Lcd_; ÆL. ['_nesh_']

hnesclic _soft, luxurious, effeminate_, AO. adv. -lîce _softly, gently,
tenderly_, _CP_. ['_neshly_']

hnescnes f. _softness, weakness, effeminacy_, _CP, Lcd, MtL_; Æ: _soft
part of anything_. ['_neshness_']

hnett (_MtL_ 4^18) = nett

hnexian (Æ) = hnescian

hnifol m. _brow, forehead_.

hnifol-crumb, -crump _inclined, leaning over, prone_, WW.

hnîgan^1 _to bow oneself, bend, bow down_: _fall, decline, sink_.
[_Ger._ neigen]

hnigian _to bend down (the head)_, #Lcd# 7a.

hniglan = hnygelan

hnipend _bending, lowly_, #HGl# 436.

hnipian _to bow down_, _Met, OEG_; Æ: _bow the head, look gloomy_, _CP_.
['_nipe_']

hnippan? _to sink down_, OEG 1579n.

hnisce (MkR 13^28) = hnesce

hnîtan^1 _to thrust, butt, knock, come into collision with, encounter_.

hnitol _thrusting forwards, addicted to butting (of an ox)_.

hnitu f. _louse-egg, 'nit,'_ _Ep, Lcd_; Æ.

hnoll m. _top, crown of the head_, _Æ, VPs_. ['_noll_']

hnossian _to strike_, #Rd# 6^7.

hnot _bare, bald, 'close-cropped,'_ _ÆGr_. ['_not_']

hnutbêam m. _nut tree_.

hnutcyrnel mn. _kernel of a nut_, #Lcd#.

hnutu f. gs. and nap. hnyte '_nut_,' _Erf, Lcd, MtR_; Mdf.

+hnycned _wrinkled_? #Lcd# 97a.

hnydele = hydele

hnygelan (i) pl. _clippings_, WW.

hnýlung f. _reclining_, WW 153^24.

+hnyscan _to crush_, MtR 21^44. [hnesce]

hnysce = hnesce

+hnyst _contrite_, ¶#PsC# 127.

hnyte gs. and nap. of hnutu.

hô = hôh

hôbanca m. _couch_, WW 280^12. [hôh]

hôc m. '_hook_,' _BH, WW_: _angle_, _Mt, Nar_.

hocc m. _mallow_, _Cp, Lcd_. ['_hock_']

hôcede _curved_, _KC_. ['_hooked_']

hôcer = hôcor

-hôciht v. heoru-h.

hôcîsern n. _small sickle_, WW 235^1.

hoclêaf n. _mallow_, #Lcd#.

hôcor n. _insult, derision_, W 164^17.

hôcorwyrde _derisive, scornful_, W 164^13.

hôd m. '_hood_,' _Ep, WW_.

hof n. _enclosure, court, dwelling, building, house, hall_: _temple,
sanctuary_. [_Ger._ hof]

hôf I. m. '_hoof_,' _Run, WW_; Æ. II. pret. 3 sg. of hebban.

hofding m. _chief, leader_. [_ON._ höfðingi]

hôfe f. _'hove,' alehoof (plant)_, _Lcd, WW_.

hofer m. _hump_, #Gl#: _swelling_.

hoferede _humpbacked_, _CP, Lcd, WW_. ['_hovered_']

hoferiend, +hoferod (ÆL) = hoferede

-hôfian v. be-h.

hôflic _pertaining to a court_, OEG 2996.

+hôfod _hoofed_, ÆL 25^44.

hôfon pret. pl. of hebban.

hofor == hofer

hôf-rec, -ræc n. _hoof-track, bridle-track_, #Lcd#.

hofrede _confined to the house, bedridden_, WW 162^8.

hôfring m. _print of a horse's hoof_ (= hôfhring) OEG 18.

hofweard m. _ædile_, WW 111^20.

hog- = hoh-

hoga I. _careful, prudent_, _DR, MtL_. ['_howe_'] II. m. _fear, care_:
_attempt, struggle_, OEG 8^283.

hoga- = hog-, hoh-

hogade = hogode

hogde pret. of hycgan or hogian.

hogelêas _free from care_, NC 303.

hogg _hog_, NC 302.

±hogian _to care for, think about, reflect, busy oneself with_, Æ:
_intend, strive, wish for_. [hyge]

hogode pret. of hogian.

hogu f. _care_, Æ.

hogung f. _endeavour_, DHy 8^12.

hôh m., gs. hôs, nap. hôas, hôs, dp. hôum _hough, heel_, _Æ, Jn, Ps_.
on h. _behind_: _point of land_, _Ct, Nar_; Mdf. ['_ho_,' '_hoe_']

hoh-fæst, hog(a)- (NG) _prudent, cautious, wise_.

hôhfôt m. _heel_, #LPs# 55^7.

hohful (hoga-, N) _careful, thoughtful_, Æ: _full of care, anxious,
pensive, sad_, _Ct, Sc_. ['_howful_']

hohfulnes f. _care, trouble_, KC 3·349^11.

hôh-hwyrfing, -hwerfing f. _heel-turning, circle_? v. OEG 18n.

hohlîce (hog-) _prudently_, LkL 16^8.

hohmôd _sad, sorrowful_, W 72^8.

hôhscanca m. _leg, shank_, #Lcd# 14a.

hohscipe (hoga-) m. _prudence_, N.

hôhsinu f. _sinew of the heel_, _Æ, Lcd_. ['_hough-sinew_']

-hôhsnian v. on-h.

hôhspor n. _heel_, WW 160^26.

hol I. _hollow_, #Lcd#: _depressed, lying in a hollow_, _CP, Ct, MH_.
['_holl_'] II. n. _hollow place, cave, hole, den_, _Ct, Lk, Met, WW_;
AO, Æ: _perforation, aperture_, _Cp_. ['_hole_,' '_holl_']

hôl n. _calumny, slander_, Æ.

-hola v. oter-h.

+hola m. _protector, defender_, Æ. [helan]

holc n? holca? m. _hole, cavity_, _Lcd_. ['_holk_']

hold I. _gracious, friendly, kind, favourable_, _AO, B_; Æ: _true,
faithful, loyal_, _Æ, LL_; CP: _acceptable, pleasant_. ['_hold_'; _ON._
hollr] adv. holde _graciously, loyally_, _Ps_. ['_holde_'] II. n. _dead
body, carcase_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_hold_'; _ON._ hold] III. m. _holder of
allodial land, ranking below a_ jarl (_Danish word_), LL: _military
chief_, MkR 6^21. [_ON._ holdr]

holdâð m. _oath of allegiance_, #Chr#.

holdelîce = holdlîce

holdhlâford m. _gracious lord, liege lord_, #Chr# 1014#e#.

holdian _to cut up, disembowel_, ÆL 23^73. [hold II.]

holdlic _faithful, friendly_, OEG 50^29. adv. -lîce _graciously_, _Æ,
WW_: _faithfully, loyally_. ['_holdely_']

holdr¯æden f. _fidelity, faithful service_, ÆH 2·150^30.

holdscipe m. _loyalty, allegiance_, #Chr#.

holecerse _a plant_, #Lcd#.

holegn = holen I.

holen I. m. '_holly_,' _Cp, WW_; Æ; Mdf. adj. _of holly_, _Lcd_. II. pp.
of helan.

hôlenga = hôlinga

holenlêaf n. _holly leaf_, #Lcd# 127a.

holenrind f. _holly bark_, #Lcd# 29b.

holenstybb m. _holly-stump_.

holh (_CP_), holg n. gs. hôles _hole, 'hollow.'_

holian _to hollow out, scoop out_, _Æ_: _to become hollow, be
perforated_, Æ. ['_hole_']

hôlian _to oppress_, _Ps_. ['_hole_']

+holian _to obtain_, CP 209^19.

holing f. _hollow place_, GD 113^11.

hôlinga adv. _in vain, without reason_.

holl = hol II.

hollêac n. _onion_? _WW_ 270^29. ['_holleke_']

holm m. ¶_wave, sea, ocean, water_, _B_: in prose, esp. in place-names
_island (esp. in a river or creek)_, _Chr_. ['_holm_']

holmærn n. _ship_, #Gen# 1422.

holmclif ¶ n. _sea-cliff, rocky shore_.

holmeg adj. _of the sea_, #Ex# 118.

holmmægen n. _force of the waves_, #Rd# 3^9.

holm-ðracu ¶ f., gs. -ðræce _restless sea_.

holmweall m. _wall of sea water_, #Ex# 467.

holmweard (#An# 359) = helmweard

holmweg m. _sea-path_, #An# 382.

holmwylm m. _billows_, B 2411.

holnes f. _hollow place_, GD 99^22 (o).

hôlonga = hôlinga

holpen pp. of helpan.

holrian = heolorian

holstæf m. _'apex,' tittle_, MtR 5^18.

holt nm. _forest, wood, grove, thicket_, _Æ, B_; CP; Mdf: _wood,
timber_, _Jul_. ['_holt_']

holt-hana, -ana m. _woodcock_, WW 344^30.

hôltihte f. _calumny_, WW.

holtwudu ¶ m. _forest, grove_, _Ph_: _wood (timber)_. [v. '_holt_']

hôlunga = hôlinga

hom == ham

hôm == ôm

hôman = ôman

hôn I. (sv^7) pret. heng, pp. hangen _to hang, suspend, crucify_, Æ:
_adorn_. II. pl. _tendrils of a vine_? A 4·143.

hon- = han-

hona = (1) heonu; (2) hana

hônede _having heels_, WW 161^26. [hôh]

+honge = +hange

hop n. _privet_, v. OEG 36^14.

hôp m. _hoop_? v. NC 303.

-hop v. fen-, môr-h.

hopa m. '_hope_,' _Æ_. [usu. tôhopa]

hôpgehnâst ¶ n. _dashing of waves_.

hopian _to 'hope,' expect, look for_, _A, Æ_; CP: _put trust in_, _Æ,
Bo, Bl_.

hôpig _eddying, surging_, #PPs# 68^5.

+hopp n. _small bag_, WW 405^3.

hoppâda m. _upper garment, cope_, WW 188^14.

hoppe f. _a kind of ornament_, AO: _dog-collar_, LL 194[8].

hoppestre f. _female dancer_, _Æ_. ['_hoppestere_']

hoppetan _to leap for joy_: _to throb_.

hoppian _to hop, jump, leap, dance_, Æ: _limp_, ÆL 21^417. [_Ger._
hüpfen]

hopscýte f. _sheet, counterpane_, Æ (9^307).

hôr n. _adultery_.

hora- = horu-

horas v. horh.

hôrcwene f. _whore, adulteress_, LL.

hord nm. _'hoard,' treasure_, _B, Chr, Gen, MtR, WW_.

hordærn = hordern

hordburg f. _treasure-city_, B, BC, #Gen#.

hord-cleofa, -clyfa m. _treasure-chest, treasury, secret chamber_, Æ.

hordcofa m. _treasure-chamber, closet_: (¶) _breast, heart, thoughts_.

hordere m. _treasurer, chamberlain, steward_, _Æ, KC_. ['_hoarder_']

hordern n. _treasury, storehouse_, Æ.

horderwýce f. _office of treasurer_, #Chr# 1137.

hordfæt n. _treasure-receptacle_, Æ.

hord-geat n., gs. -gates _door to a treasure-chamber_, #Rd# 43^11.

hordgestrêon ¶ n. _hoarded treasure_.

hordian _to 'hoard,'_ _Æ_.

hordloca m. _treasure-chest, coffer_: (¶) _secret thoughts, mind_.

hordmægen n. _riches_, #Da# 675.

hordmâðm ¶ m. _hoarded treasure_.

hordweard m. _guardian of treasure_: _king_: _heir, first-born_.

hordwela m. _hoarded wealth_, B 2344.

hordweorðung f. _honouring by gifts from the hoard_, B 952.

hordwitt n. _treasure of wisdom_, #Kl#.

hordwynn f. _delightful treasure_, B 2270.

hordwyrðe _worth hoarding_, B 2245?

hôre f. _whore, prostitute_, OEG.

horeht = horwiht

+horgian _to defile_, #Bk#: _spit_.

horh (horg) mn., gs. hor(w)es, instr. horu, nap. horas _phlegm, mucus_,
_Æ, El, Ep, Lcd_: _dirt, defilement, uncleanness_; Mdf. ['_hore_']

horheht = horwiht

horian _to cry out_, #Ps#.

+horian (N) = +horgian

horig _foul, filthy_, _Æ, LL_. ['_hory_']

hôring m. _adulterer, fornicator_, W 309^21.

horn m. _horn (musical instrument, drinking-horn, cupping-horn)_,
_beast's horn_, _Ct, Lcd, LL, VPs_; AO: _projection, pinnacle_, _Ps_.

hornb¯ære _horned_, #ÆGr# 27^16.

hornblâwere m. _horn-blower, trumpeter_.

hornboga ¶ m. _bow tipped with horn_?

hornbora m. _horn-bearer, trumpeter_, WW.

hornfisc m. _garfish_, #An# 370.

hornfôted _hoofed_, WW 213^22.

horngêap ¶ _broad between the pinnacles or gables_.

horngestrêon n. _wealth of pinnacles (on a house)_? [or ?=
hordgestrêon], #Ruin# 23.

+hornian _to insult_, MkL 12^4.

hornlêas _without horns_, ES 39·349.

hornpîc m. _pinnacle_, _MtL_. [v. '_pike_']

hornreced n. _hall with gables_, B 704.

hornsæl n. = hornsele

hornscêað f. _pinnacle_, MtL 4^5.

hornscip n. _beaked ship_, #An# 274.

hornsele m. _house with gables_, #Gen# 1821.

hornungsunu m. _bastard_, WW 456^10.

horo- = horu-

horpytt m. _mud-hole_, EC 445^15.

hors n. _horse_, _OET, WW, VPs_; Æ, AO, CP; Mdf.

horsb¯ær f. _horse-litter_, _BH_; ÆL. ['_horse-bier_']

horsc _sharp, quick, active, ready, daring_: _quick-witted, wise,
prudent_.

horscamb m. _'horse-comb,' curry-comb, strigil_, _WW_.

horschwæl (= *horshwæl) m. _walrus_, AO 17^36.

horsclic _sordid, squalid, foul_, OEG 1789. [horh]

horsclîce _briskly, readily, promptly_: _prudently, wisely_.

horscniht m. _master of the horse, equerry, groom, esquire_, Æ (8^242).

horscræt n. _'biga,' chariot_, WW 194^26.

horselene f. _elecampane_, _WW_. ['_horseheal_']

horsern n. _stable_, WW.

horsgærstûn m. _meadow in which horses are kept_, KC 3·414^25.

horshelene = horselene

horshierde (i^2, y^2) m. _ostler, groom_.

±horsian _to provide with horses_, _Chr_. ['_horse_']

horslîce = horsclîce

hors-ðegn, -ðên m. _ostler, groom, equerry_: _muleteer_, GD 191^23.

horsw¯æn m. _chariot_, WW 140^4.

horswealh m. _groom, equerry_, LL 22; 132.

horsweard f. _care of horses_, LL 445[2].

horsweg m. _bridle-road_, _KC_. ['_horseway_']

hortan sbpl. _'whortle'-berries_, v. OEG 2^433.

horu = horh

horusêað m. _sink, pit_, #Bo# 112^15.

horuweg (o^2) m. _dirty road_? KC 5·173^17.

horweht = horwiht

horwes v. horh.

horwig = orweg

+horwigian _to defile, spit upon_.

horwiht (e^2) _mucose, defiled, filthy_, #Guth# 36^9.

horwyll m. _muddy stream_, EC 445^19.

horxlic = horsclic

hôs I. f. _escort, company_, B 924. II. f. _bramble, briar_. III.
v. hôh.

hosa m., hose f. '_hose_,' _WW_.

hosebend m. _hose-band, garter_, OEG 4822.

hosp m. _reproach, insult, contumely_, Æ: _blasphemy_, Æ.

hospcwide m. _insulting speech_, #El# 523.

hospettan _to ridicule_, Cp 697#s#.

hospspr¯æc f. _jeer, taunt_, ÆH 2·514.

hospul '_irritus_,' #RPs# 88^35.

hospword n. _abusive language, contemptuous expression_, Æ.

hosse = hysse

hôstig (ÆL 35^192) = ôstig

hosu f. _hose_, RB: _pod, husk_, Cp 1867.

hotor = otor

hoðma ¶ m. _darkness, the grave_.

hrâ = hr¯æw

hraca m. _throat_, _Lcd_? ['_rake_']

hrâca (¯æ) m. _clearing of the throat_: _spittle, mucus_.

hrace, hracu f. _throat_, _Æ, VPs_ (æ). ['_rake_']

hrad- v. hræd-

hrade = hraðe

±hradian (ea, ð) _to be quick, hasten, do diligently_: _further,
prosper_, ÆL 20^78.

hradung (æ) f. _quickness, despatch, diligence_. on hrædinge
_quickly_, ÆL.

hræ- = hra-, hre-, hrea-

hr¯æ = hr¯æw

hr¯æ- = hrêa-, hrêo-, r¯æ-

hr¯æca m. _clearing the throat_. [= hrâca]

hr¯æcan tr. and intr. _to 'reach,' bring up (blood or phlegm)_, _CP,
Lcd_; Æ.

+hræcan = +reccan

hr¯æcetung f. _eructation_, #Lcd# 69b.

hr¯æcgebræc n. _sore throat_, WW.

hræcing f. _detention_, DR 65^13.

hr¯æctan _to eructate_, #Lcd# 84a.

hr¯æctunge f. _uvula_, #Lcd# 17a.

hr¯æcung f. _clearing of the throat_, _Lcd_. ['_reaching_']

hræd (e) (hrad- occly. in obl. cases) _quick, nimble, ready, active,
alert, prompt_, _CP, Gl, Mt_. ['_rad_']

hrædbîta m. _blackbeetle_, WW (hræð-).

hrædfêrnes f. _swiftness_, #Bo# 72^17.

hrædhýdig _hasty_.

hrædhýdignes f. _haste, precipitation_, CP.

hræding f. _haste_, W 22^14.

hrædlic (ð) _quick, sudden, premature_, _B, Bo_; Æ, AO, CP. adv. -lîce
_quickly, hastily, soon, speedily, forthwith_, Æ, CP. ['_radly_,'
'_rathely_']

hrædlicnes (e) f. _suddenness_, #Guth#: _earliness_, #EPs# 118^147.

hrædmôd _hasty_, ÆL 16^342.

hrædnes f. (±) _quickness_: _brevity_.

hrædrîpe (ræd-) _ripening early_, WW.

hrædtæfle _quick at throwing dice_? #Cra# 73 (v. ES 43·339).

hrædung = hradung

hrædw¯æn m. _swift chariot_.

hrædwilnes f. _haste, precipitation_, CP.

hrædwyrde _hasty of speech_, #Wa# 66.

hræfn I. hræfen (e) m. _raven_, _Æ, B, G, VPs_: _sign of the raven (the
Danish banner)_. II. = hæfern

hræfncynn (e) n. _raven-species_, Æ.

hræfnesfôt m. _ravensfoot, cinquefoil_, OET p8.

-hr¯ægan v. ofer-hr.

hrægel = hrægl

hrægelgefrætwodnes f. _fine clothing_, LL (396^27).

hrægelðegn m. _keeper of the robes, 'vestiarius.'_

hrægl n. (e) _dress, clothing_, _Gl, Jn_; AO, CP: _armour_: _sail_.
['_rail_']

hræglcyst f. _clothes-box, trunk_, Ct.

hræglgew¯æde n. _dress_, WW 430^33.

hræglhûs f. _vestry_, RB.

hræglscêara fp. _shears for cutting cloth_, WW 241^40 (rægl-).

hrægltalu f. _vestment-fund_, KC, RB.

hræglung f. _clothing_, WW 151^5.

hræglweard m. _keeper of vestments or robes_, WW 279^19.

hrægnloca = brægnloca

hræmn, hr¯æm = hræfn

hræn = hærn

hr¯æron pret. pl. of hrêran.

hr¯æs v. hr¯æw.

hræscetung = ræscetung  [[Cross-reference uncertain.]]

-hræscian v. â-hr.

hrætelwyrt f. _rattlewort_, WW 301^3.

hræð == hræd. ['_rathe_']

hr¯æw I. (â, êa) nm. gs. hr¯æs _living body_: _corpse, carcase, carrion_.
II. = hrêaw I.

hr¯æwîc (hrêa-) n. _place of corpses_, B 1214.

hrâfyll m. _slaughter_, B 277.

hrâgîfre _deadly_, WW 408^10.

hrâgra m. _heron_, #Gl#.

hramgealla = ramgealla

hrâmig = hrêmig

hramma m. _cramp, spasm_.

hram-sa (o) m., -se f. _onion, garlic_, _Ep, Lcd, WW_. ['_rams_,'
'_ramson_']

hramsacrop m. _head of wild garlic_, #Gl#.

hran (o) m. _whale_, #Gl#.

hrân I. m. _reindeer_, AO. II. pret. 3 sg. of hrînan.

hrand I. = rand. II. pret. 3 sg. of hrindan.

hrandsparwa (o^1) m. _sparrow_, MtL 10^29.

hranfix (o) m. _whale_, B 540.

hrânhund? m. _deerhound_? v. LL 2·117.

hranmere (o) m. _sea_, #Met# 5^10.

hranrâd ¶ f. _(whale's-road), sea_.

hratele f. _'bobonica' (plant)_, WW 296^2.

hratian _to rush, hasten_, OET (= hradian?).

hraðe (æ, e) adv. comp. hraðor, superl. hraðost _hastily, quickly,
promptly, readily, immediately, soon_, _Æ, B, Bo, Cr, VPs_; CP: _too
soon_, _Bo_. swâ h. swâ _as soon as_, _Æ_. ['_rathe_,' '_rather_,'
'_rathest_']

hraðer = hreðer

hraðian = hradian

hrâw = hr¯æw

hrâwêrig _weary in body_, #Ph# 554.

hrâwlic = hrêowlic

hrêa I. f. _indigestion_? #Lcd# 94b. [hrêaw I.] II. = hrêaw I. and II.

hrêac m. _'rick,' heap, stack_, _TC, WW_.

hrêaccopp m. _top of a rick_, LL 453[21,4].

hrêacmete m. _food given to the labourers on completing a rick_, LL
452´.

-hrêad v. earm-hr. [hrêoðan]  [[variant of "hrêðan"?]]

hrêaf == rêaf

hrêam m. _noise, outcry, alarm_, _Æ, CP_: _cry, lamentation, sorrow_,
_B, Cr_. ['_ream_']

hrêamig _clamorous_: _lamenting_.

hrêanes = hrêohnes

hrêas pret. 3 sg. of hrêosan.

hrêat pret. 3 sg. of hrûtan.

hreaðemûs (a^2) f. _bat_.

hreaðian (#VPs#) = hradian

hrêaw I. (êo) '_raw_,' _Æ, Lcd_. II. = hr¯æw nm. III. pret. 3 sg. of
hrêowan.

hrêaw- = hrêow-

hrêawde pret. 3 sg. _was raw_, WW 215^43 (rêaw-).

hrêawîc = hr¯æwîc

hrêawnes I. f. _rawness, crudity_, OEG 3283. II. = hrêownes

+hrec = +rec

hrêc- = hr¯æc-

hred (#KGl#) = hræd

-hreda v. æfreda.

hreddan _to free from, recover, rescue, save_, _Cr_; Æ: _take away_.
['_redd_']

hreddere m. _defender_, NC 303.

hreddung (æ) f. _salvation, liberation_, Æ.

hredmônað = hrêðmônað

±hrêfan _to roof_, Æ. [hrôf]

hrefn = (1) hræfn; (2) hæfern

hrefnan = ræfnan

hrefncynn = hræfncynn

hregresi? _groin_, MLN 11·333; ZDA 33·244.

hrêh = hrêoh

hrem = hræfn I.

hrêman I. _to boast_. [_Ger._ rühmen] II. = hrîman

hrêmig ¶ _boasting, vaunting, exulting_.

hremm == hræfn I.

±hremman _to hinder, cumber_, Æ.

hremming f. _hindrance, obstacle_.

hremn = hræfn I.

hrenian _to smell of, be redolent of_, #Sc# 106^5.

hrêo = hrêoh, hrêow

hrêocan = rêocan

hrêod n. _'reed,' rush_, _Æ, BH, Gl_; CP; Mdf.

±hrêodan^2 _to adorn_ (only in pp. ±hroden).

hrêodbedd n. '_reed-bed_,' _Æ_.

hrêodcynn n. _kind of reed_, NC 303.

hrêod-ig, -iht, -ihtig (e^2) _reedy_.

hrêodwæter n. _reedy marsh_, #Nar# 20^23.

hrêof _rough, scabby, leprous_, _Whale_; CP. as sb. = _leper_.
['_reof_']

-hrêofian v. â-hr.

hrêofl I. f. _scabbiness, leprosy_, CP. II. adj. _leprous_.

hrêofla m. _roughness of the skin, leprosy_, Æ: _leper_, Æ. [hrêof]

hrêof-lic, -lig (Æ) _leprous_.

hrêofnes f. _leprosy_, Æ.

hrêofol, hrêoful = hrêofl I.

hrêog = hrêoh

hrêoh (ê) I. adj. _rough, fierce, wild, angry_, _Met_; Æ, AO, CP:
_disturbed, troubled, sad_ (v. hrêow): _stormy, tempestuous_, _B, Bo,
Chr_. ['_reh_'] II. n. _stormy weather, tempest_.

hrêohful _stormy_, ES 39·349.

hrêohlic _stormy, tempestuous_, W 136^27.

hrêohmôd _savage, ferocious_: _sad, troubled_.

hrêohnes (êa) f. _rough weather, tempest, storm_, Æ.

hrêol sb. '_reel_,' _A, WW_; Æ.

hrêon- = rêon-

hrêones = (1) hrêohnes; (2) hrêownes

hrêop pret. 3 sg. of hrôpan.

hreopian = hrepian

hrêorig adj. _in ruins_, #Ruin# 3. [hrêosan]

±hrêosan^2 _to fall, sink, fall down, go to ruin_, _Æ, B, Cr, VPs_; AO,
CP: _rush_. ['_reose_']

hrêosendlic _perishable_.

hrêosian = hrêowsian

hrêosð (#KGl#) pres. 3 sg. of hrêosan.

-hrêoða (ê, êa) v. bord-, scild-hr.

hrêoung (îu) f. _hardness of breathing, asthma_.

±hrêow I. f. _sorrow, regret, penitence, repentance, penance_, _B, Bl,
CP, Cr_. ['_rue_'] II. _sorrowful, repentant_. III. adj. = hrêoh? IV. =
hrêaw I. and III.

hrêowan^2 (often impersonal w. d. pers.) _to affect (a person) with
regret or contrition_, _Bo, CP, Gen, LL_: _distress, grieve_, _Cr, Gen_:
(intr.) _be penitent, repent_, MkL. ['_rue_,' '_i-rew_']

hrêowcearig ¶ _troubled, sad_.

hrêowende _penitent_, _LkL_ (æ). ['_rueing_']

hrêowesung = hrêowsung

hrêowian _to repent_, MkL 1^15.

hrêowig _sorrowful, sad_, #Gen# 799.

hrêowigferhð ¶ _sad, sorrowful_.

hrêowigmôd ¶ _sad, sorrowful_.

hrêowlic (î, ý) _grievous, pitiful, sad, wretched, miserable, cruel_,
_Chr, Ps_. adv. -lîce, _AO, Chr_.

hrêownes (êa) f. _penitence, contrition, repentance_, _LL, Gl_; CP.
['_rueness_,' '_rewniss_']

hrêowon = rêowon pret. pl. of rôwan.

hrêowsende = hrêosende  [[form of "hrêosan"]]

±hrêowsian (ý) _to feel sorrow or penitence_, _AO, Mt_; CP. ['_reusie_']

hrêowsung f. _repentance, penitence, sorrow_, _CP, Lk_; Æ. ['_reusing_']

±hrepian (eo), hreppan _to touch, treat_, _Mt_; Æ: _attack_, #Bk# 6.
['_repe_']

hrepsung (ÆL) = repsung

hrepung f. _sense of touch, touch_, Æ.

hrêr _lightly boiled_, _Lcd_. ['_rear_']

±hrêran (tr.) _to move, shake, agitate_. [hrôr; _Ger._ rühren]

hrêrednes (ý) f. _haste_, #LPs# 51^6.

hrêremus f. _bat_, _WW_. ['_rearmouse_'; hrêran]

hrêrnes (ý) f. _disturbance, commotion, tempest_.

hresl = hrisil  [[headword spelled "hrîsel"]]

+hresp n. _tearing, destruction_, NC 294.

+hrespan _to tear_, #PPs# 43^12.

hrêst = hrýst pres. 3 sg. of hrêosan.

hreð = hræd

hrêð ¶ mn. _victory, glory_.

hrêða m. _covering of goat-skin_, #Gl#.

hrêðan _to exult, rejoice_, #Ex# 573.

hreðe = hraðe

hrêðe = rêðe

hrêðêadig ¶ _glorious, victorious_.

hrêðemônað = hrêðmônað

hreðer ¶ (a, æ) m. _breast, bosom_: _heart, mind, thought_: _womb_.

hreðerbealo n. _heart-sorrow_, B 1343.

hreðercofa m. _breast_, #Cr# 1323.

hreðerglêaw _wise, prudent_, #Ex# 13.

hreðerloca ¶ m. _breast_.

-hrêðig v. êad-, sige-, will-hr.  [[headword spelled "wilhrêðig"]]

hrêðlêas _inglorious_, #Gu# 878.

hrêðmônað m. _month of March_.

hrêðnes f. _cruelty, inclemency_, N, ÆP 136^23.

hreðor = hreðer

hrêðsigor m. _glorious victory_, B 2583.

hricg == hrycg

hrîcian _to cut, cut to pieces_, ÆL 23^73.

hricsc _rick, wrench, sprain_, #Lcd# 27a.

hriddel n. _'riddle,' sieve_, _LL_ 455[17].

hrîder (_Gl_), hridder (_Æ_) n. _sieve_. ['_ridder_']

hrîdrian _to sift, winnow_, _Lk_. ['_ridder_']

+hrîered _destroyed_, WW 496^18.

hrîewð pres. 3 sg. of hrêowan.

hrif n. _belly, womb_, Æ, AO.

+hrifian _to bring forth_, #LPs# 7^15.

+hrifnian _to tear off_, AO 142^26.

hriftêung f. _pain in the bowels_, WW 112^23.

hrîfðo f. _scurfiness_, #Lcd# 90b. [hrêof]

hrifwærc (e^2) m. _pain in the bowels_, WW 112^23.

hrifwund _wounded in the belly_, LL 6[61].

hrig == hrycg

hrîm m. _'rime,' hoar-frost_, _Ph_; Æ.

hrîman (ê, ý) _to cry out, shout, rave_, _Æ_ (ý), _CP_ (ê), _JnL_ (ê):
_bewail, lament_. ['_reme_'; hrêam]

-hrîman v. be-hr.

hrîmceald _icy cold_, #Wa# 4.

hrîmforst m. _hoar-frost_, #LPs# 77^47 (rîm-).

hrîmgicel m. _icicle_, #Seaf# 17.

hrîmig _rimy, frosty_, #Bl#.

hrîmigheard _frozen hard_, #Rd# 88^7.

+hrin n. _morsel_, #EPs# 147^17.

+hrîn (NG) = +rîn = +rên

hrînan^1 (w. a. g. or d.) _to touch, lay hold of, reach, seize, strike_,
_Ps_. ['_rine_']

hrincg == hring

hrind = rind

hrindan^3 _to thrust, push_, #Rd# 55^4.

hrine m. _sense of touch_.

±hrinenes f. _touch, contact_, BH.

hring I. m. _ring, link of chain, fetter, festoon_, _B, CP, G, Lcd_:
_circle, circular group_, _Ph_: _border, horizon_, _Gen_: (¶) (pl.)
_rings of gold (as ornaments and as money)_: (¶) _corslet_, B: _circuit
(of a year)_, _cycle, course_: _orb, globe_. II. ¶ m. (only in wôpes
hr.) _sound_.

hringan _to 'ring,' sound, clash_, _B, Sol_: _announce by bells_, _RB_.

hringbân n. _ring-shaped bone_, _WW_ 157. ['_ringbone_']

hringboga m. _coiled serpent_, B 2561.

hringe f. _ring_.

hringed ¶ _made of rings_.

hringedstefna ¶ m. _ring-prowed ship_.

hring-fâg, -fâh _ring-spotted, variegated_.

hringfinger m. '_ring-finger_,' _Lcd, WW_.

hringgewindla m. _sphere_, WW 426^25.

hringîren n. _ring mail_, B 322.

hringloca m. _coat of ring-mail_, #Ma# 145.

hring-m¯æl §, -m¯æled § _adorned with a ring (of a sword)_.

hringmere n. _bath_, #Ruin# 455.

hringnaca m. _ring-prowed ship_, B 1863.

hringnett n. _ring-mail_, B 1889.

hringsele ¶ m. _hall in which rings are bestowed_.

hringsetl n. _circus_, OEG.

hringsittende _sitting round, looking on_, OEG 65.

hringðegu ¶ f. _receiving of rings_.

hringweorðung f. _honouring by the gift of rings_, B 3017.

hringwîsan adv. _ringwise, in rings_, #Nar# 16^1.

hrîning f. _touch_, _JnL_. [v. '_rine_']

+hriorde (w) = +reorde  [[form of "±reord"?]]

hrîp- = rîp-

hrîs n. _twig, branch_. [_Ger._ reis]

hrisc = risc

hrîscan = hrýscan

hrîseht _bushy, bristly_, WW 513^8.

hrisel = rysel

hrîsel, hrîs(i)l f? _shuttle_: _bone of the lower arm, radius_.
[hrisian]

  [[Spelled "hrisil", "hrisl" in first edition: see entry for
  "hresl".]]

hrisian (y) (tr. and intr.) _to shake, move, be shaken, clatter_, _An,
B, Ps, VPs_. ['_rese_']

hrîsig (rýsig) _bushy_, OEG 8^337.

hrîst pres. 3 sg. of hrêosan.

hristende, hristlende _noisy, creaky_.

hristle f. _rattle_, WW 391^18.

hristung f. _shaking, quivering, rattling noise_, #Lcd# 97a.

hrið (u) m. _fever_, #Lcd# 80a.

hrîð I. § f. _snow-storm, tempest_. II. = hrîðer

hriðâdl f. _fever_, #Lcd# 80a.

hrîðer (ý) n. _neat cattle, ox, bull, cow, heifer_, _Bl, Ct, Lcd, WW_.
['_rother_']

hrîðeren _of cattle_, _Lcd_. ['_rotheren_']

hrîðerfrêols (ý) m. _cattle-festival_, OEG 4719.

hrîðerhêawere (y) m. _butcher_, Æ.

hrîðerheord (ý) _herd of cattle_, _Æ_. [v. '_rother_']

hrîðerhyrde (ý) m. _herdsman_, Æ.

hrîðfald m. _cattle-pen_.

hrîðheorde (ie) = hrîðerhyrde

hriðian _to shake, be feverish, have a fever_, Æ.

hrîðig (ý) _storm-beaten_? _ruined_? #Wa# 77. [hrîð]

hriðing f. _fever_, #Lcd# 96b.

hrîung = hrêoung

hrîw- = hrêow-

hrîwð pres. 3 sg. of hrêowan.

hrôc m. '_rook_,' _Cp, ÆL_.

hrôd = rôd

hroden I. (±) _covered, adorned, ornamented_ (pp. of hrêodan). II. =
roden  [[II. Cross-reference uncertain.]]

hroder = rodor

hrôf m. _'roof,' ceiling_, _Æ, B, Cr, G_; AO, CP _top, summit_, _Bo, Cr,
Mk_: _heaven, sky_, _Cr_.

hrôffæst _with a firm roof_, #Met# 7^6.

hrôflêas (rôf-) _roofless_, WW 186^30.

hrôfsele m. _roofed hall_, B 1515.

hrôfstân m. _roof stone_, ÆH 1·508.

hrôftîgel f. _roofing tile_, WW.

hrôftimber n. _material for roofing_, OEG 2256.

hrôfwyrhta m. _roof-maker, builder_, WW.

hromsa = hramsa

hron == hran

hrop = rop

hrôp m. _clamour, outcry, lamentation_, _Bl_. ['_rope_']

hrôpan^7 ¶ _to shout, proclaim_: _cry out, scream, howl_, _Gu, Ps_.
['_rope_']

-hrops v. ofer-hr.

hropwyrc = ropwærc

hrôr _stirring, busy, active_: _strong, vigorous, brave_.

+hror n. _calamity, plague, ruin_, BH 284^4. [hrêosan]

±hroren pp. of hrêosan.

+hrorenes f. _downfall, ruin_, #LPs# 31^4.

+hrorenlic _perishable, transitory, unstable_, NC 294; MFH.

hrôse = rôse

hrôst m. _perch, 'roost,'_ _LL_ 454[11].

hrôstbêag m. _woodwork (of a roof)_, #Ruin# 32.

hrot m. _scum_, #Lcd# 84a.

hrôðer = hrôðor

hrôðgirela m. _crown_, #RPs# 20^4.

hroðhund (A 8·450) = roðhund

hrôðor ¶ m. _solace, joy, pleasure_: _benefit_.

hrûm m. _soot_, #Shr#, WW.

-hrûmian v. be-hr.

hrûmig _sooty_, WW 362^12.

hrung f. _cross-bar, spoke_, _Rd_ 23^10. ['_rung_']

hruron pret. pl. of hrêosan.

hrurul '_deciduus_,' BDS 30·11^33.

hrûse ¶ f. _earth, soil, ground_.

hrût (u?) '_balidus_' (_validus_?), WW 361^13.

hrûtan^5 _to make a noise, whiz, snore_, _Æ, Cp_. ['_rout_']

hruð = hrið

hrûðer = hrîðer

+hrûxl n. _noise, tumult_, v. ES 39·344.

hrûxlian (rûx-) _to make a noise_, MtR 9^23.

hryc = hrycg

-hrycce v. corn-hr.  [[variant of "cornhwicce"]]

hrycg (i) m. _back, spine_, _Æ, CP, Lcd_; AO: _'ridge,' elevated
surface_, _B, Ct, Lk, Ps_; Mdf.

hrycgbân n. _back-bone, spine_, _Ps_. ['_ridge-bone_']

hrycgbr¯ædan (hrig-) pl. _flesh on each side of the spine_, #Lcd#
3·118^24.

hrycgh¯ær n. _hair on an animal's back_, #Lcd# 1·360^19.

hrycghrægl (i) n. _mantle_, TC 529^10.

hrycg-mearg (i, -mearð) n. _spinal marrow_, WW 292^7.

hrycgmerglið n. _spine_, WW 265^23.

hrycgrib (i) n. _rib_, WW.

hrycg-rible, -riple _flesh on each side of the spine_, WW.

hrycgweg m. _'ridge-way,' road along a ridge_, _Ct_.

hrycigan _to plough over again_, GPH 398.

hryding f. _clearing, patch of cleared land_, WW 147^12.

hrýfing f. _scab_, #Lcd# 32b. [hrêof]

hryg = hrycg

hrýman (ê, î) _to cry out, shout, rave_, _Æ, CP_: _bewail, lament_,
_JnL_ (ê). ['_reme_']

hrýme = hrûm

hrympelle = rimpel

+hryne = +ryne

hryre I. m. _fall, ruin, destruction, decay_, _Æ, B, Bo_; AO, CP.
[hrêosan] II. _perishable_, Æ. ['_rure_']

hrýre- = hrêr-, hrêre-

hrýscan _to creak_, v. ES 39·344.

hrysel = rysel

hrysian, hryssan = hrisian

hryst = hyrst

hrýst pres. 3 sg. of hrêosan.

hrystan = hyrstan

hrýte (y?) '_balidinus_,' WW 163^18 (cp. hrût).

hrýðer == hrîðer

hrýðig = hrîðig

hryðða = ryðða

hrýwlic = hrêowlic

hrýwsian = hrêowsian

hrýwð pres. 3 sg. of hrêowsian.

hû adv. '_how_,' CP, Æ. hû gerâdes; hû meta _how_. hû gêares _at what
time of year_. hû nyta _wherefore_. hû ne dôð...? _do not...?_ hû
nys...? _is not...?_: (with comparatives) _the_: (±) _in some way or
other_, _Shr_: hû ne nû '_nonne_.'

hûcs, hûcx = hûsc

hûdenian _to shake_, CP 461^16.

hûf- = ûf I. and II.

hûfe _covering for the head_, _Cp, WW_. ['_houve_'; _Ger._ haube]

hûfian _to put a covering on the head_, Æ.

hû-hwega, -hugu _somewhere about_. h. swâ _about_.

hui! huig! interj.

huilpe = hwilpe

hulc m. _'hulk,' ship_, _LL, WW_; Æ: _hut_, _Æ, LL, WW_.

hulfestre f. _plover_, WW 132^12.

hûlic pron. _of what sort_.

hulpon pret. pl. of helpan.

hulu f. _husk, pod_, _WW_. ['_hull_']

hûluco (AO) = hûlic

huma = uma  [[headword spelled "ûma"]]

humele = hymele

hûmen (VHy) = ýmen  [[headword spelled "ymen"]]

hûmeta adv. _in what way, how_, Æ.

huncettan _to limp, halt_, #RPs# 17^46.

hund I. n. _hundred_, _A, AO, Mk_; Æ; (in comp.) _decade_. ['_hund_']
II. m. _hound, dog_, _Bo, CP, Jud_; Æ, AO.

hundæhtatig (_VPs_) = hundeahtatig

hundællef- (-ændlæf-) = hundendlufon-

hundeahtatig num. '_eighty_,' Æ.

hundeahtatigwintere _eighty years old_, Æ.

hundend-lufontig, -leftig (æ^2) _hundred and ten_.

hund-endlufontigoða, -ælleftiogoða _hundred and tenth_, CP.

hundesbêo f. _dog's parasite_, WW 380^21.

hundescwelcan pl. _colocynth berries_, WW 364^31.

hundesflêoge f. _dog's parasite_, AO.

hundeshêafod n. _snapdragon_, #Lcd#.

hundeslûs f. _dog's parasite_, Æ.

hundes-micge, -tunge f. _cynoglossum (plant)_, #Lcd#.

hundeswyrm m. _dog's parasite, dog's worm_, WW 122^25.

hundfeald _hundredfold_, _Æ_. ['_hundfold_']

hundfrêa m. _centurion_, MtL 22^19 mg.

hundlic _of or like dogs, canine_, Æ.

hundnigontêoða _ninetieth_, Æ.

hundnigontig _ninety_, Æ.

hundnigontigwintre _ninety years old_, Æ.

hund-red, -rað n. _'hundred' (number)_, _G, Ps, WW, MtL_ (að); Æ:
_hundred (political district)_: _hundred-court, or assembly of the men
of a hundred_. hundredes ealdor, mann _head of the hundred court,
centurion_.

hundredgemôt n. _hundred-moot_, LL.

hundredmann m. _centurion_, Æ.

hundredpenig m. _contribution levied by the sheriff or lord of the
hundred for the support of his office_, TC 432; 433.

hundreð (_MkR_) = hundred

hundseofontig num. _seventy_, Æ.

hundseofontigfeald _seventy-fold_, Æ.

hundseofontigoða _seventieth_, CP (io^2, io^4).

hundseofontigwintre _seventy years old_, Æ.

hundtêontig _hundred_, Æ.

hundtêontig-feald, -fealdlic _hundredfold_. adv. -lîce, W 237^9.

hundtêontiggêare _being of the age of a hundred_, Æ.

hundtêontigwintre _a hundred years old_, NC 303.

hundtwelftig num. _hundred and twenty_, Æ, AO.

hundtwentig num. _hundred and twenty_, Æ.

hundtwentigwintre _aged a hundred and twenty_, Æ.

hundwealh m. _servant who looked after dogs_, WW 111^25 (æ^2).

hundwelle _a hundred-fold_, MtL 13^8.

hundwintre _aged a hundred years_, Æ.

hûne f. _horehound_, #Lcd#.

hû ne nû '_nonne_,' #RPs# 52^5; Hy 6^6.

hunger = hungor

hungerbiten _hunger-bitten, starving_, #Chr# 1096.

hungergêar n. _famine year_, Æ.

hungerl¯æwe _famishing, starving_, LHy 3^5.

hungerlic _hungry, famishing_, WW.

hungor m. _'hunger,' desire_, _An, Cr, VPs, WW_; CP: _famine_, _Æ, Mt,
Chr_.

hungrig _'hungry,' famishing_, _MtL, Gu_; Æ, AO.

hungur = hungor

hunig n. '_honey_,' _AO, VPs_; Æ, CP.

hunigæppel m. _pastille_? _ball of honey_? OET (Cp 1512).

hunigb¯ære _honeyed_, OEG.

hunigbin f. _vessel for honey_, LL 455[17].

hunigcamb f. '_honey-comb_,' _Sc_ 50^9.

hunigflôwende _flowing with honey_, #Gu# 1250.

huniggafol n. _rent paid in honey_, LL 448[4,5].

hunigsûge f. _honeysuckle_? _clover_? _privet_? _Cp, WW_.
['_honeysuck_']

hunigswête _'honey-sweet,' mellifluous_, _Æ_.

hunigtêar m. _honey which drips from the comb_.

hunigtêar-en, -lic _nectar-like_, #Gl#.

huni-sûge, -sûce = hunigsûge

hûnspora m. _'dolon,' pike_? Cp 356#d#.

hunta m. _huntsman_, Æ, AO: _a kind of spider_, _Lcd_ 54a. ['_hunt_']

huntað = huntoð

huntaðfaru f. _hunting expedition_, LL 252[22].

±huntian, huntgan _to 'hunt'_ (intr.), _Lcd, WW_; (tr.) _Æ_.

hunticge f. _huntress_, A 6·188.

huntigspere n. _hunting-spear_, _WW_.

huntigystre = hunticge

huntoð, huntnoð, huntnold, huntnað m. _hunting, what is caught by
hunting, game, prey_, _Æ, Ct, Lcd_; AO. ['_hunteth_']

huntung f. '_hunting_,' _WW_: _a hunt, chase_, _DR_: _what is hunted,
game_, ES 37·188.

hûnðyrlu np. _holes in the upper part of a mast_, WW 288^15.

hûon == hwôn

hupbân, huppbân = hypbân

-hupian v. on-h.

hupseax n. _hip-sword, short sword, dagger_. [hup- = hype-]

hurnitu = hyrnetu  [[under "hyrnet"]]

hûru adv. _at least, at all events, however, nevertheless, yet, even,
only_, _LL_; Æ: _about, not less than_, _AO_: _surely, truly, certainly,
indeed, especially_, CP. h. swîðost _most particularly_. ['_hure_']

hûruðinga _at least, especially_, Æ.

hûs n. '_house_,' _B, G, RB_; Æ, AO, CP: _dwelling-place_, _El, Ph_:
_household_, _JnL_: _family, race_, _Ps_.

±hûsa m. _member of a household_, G.

hûsærn n. _dwelling-house_, NC 303.

hûsbonda (ô^2?) m. _householder, master of a house_, _Mt, Chr_.
['_husband_']

hûsbonde f. _mistress of a house_, Æ.

hûsbryce (e^2, i^2) m. _housebreaking, burglary_, _LL_.
['_housebreach_']

hûsbrycel m. _housebreaking, burglary_, WW 205^28.

hûsbryne m. _burning of a house_, Ct.

hûsbunda = hûsbonda

hûsc n. _mockery, derision, scorn, insult_, _Gen, WW_. ['_hux_']

hûscarl m. _one of the household corps, member of the king's bodyguard_,
_Chr, KC_. ['_housecarl_'; _ON._]

hûsclic _shameful, ignominious_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

hûscword n. _insulting speech_, _An_. [v. '_hux_']

hûsel = hûsl

hûselbox _receptacle of the host_, ÆP 178^6.

hûselhâlgung f. _attendance at the eucharist, communicating_, Æ.

hûsellâf f. _remains of the eucharist_, LL (358^22).

hûselportic (u^2) m. _sacristy_, BH 94^10.

hûsfæst adj. _occupying a house_, Ct.

hûshefen m. _ceiling_, WW 432^8. [heofon]

hûshlâford m. _master of the house_, Æ.

hûshlêow n. _housing, shelter_, LL (282^25); W 74^4.

±hûsian _to 'house,' receive into one's house_, _LL_.

hûsincel n. _habitation_, DR, #VPs#.

hûsl (-sel, -sul) n. _'housel,' eucharist, Lord's supper_, _Æ, BH_: _the
host_, _LL_: _a sacrifice_, _MtL_ 12^7.

hûslbearn (-ul) n. _communicant_, #Gu# 531.

hûsldisc m. _housel-dish, paten_.

hûsl-fæt n. nap. -fatu _sacrificial or sacramental vessel_.

hûslgang m. _going to, partaking of the eucharist_, Æ.

hûslgenga m. _communicant_, v. LL 2·263.

hûslian _to administer the sacrament_, _LL_. ['_housel_']

hûslðên m. _acolyte_, LL.

hûslung f. _administration of the sacrament_, _Æ_. ['_houseling_']

hûslwer (-el) m. _communicant_, #Gu# 768.

hûsr¯æden f. _household, family_, #LPs#.

±hûsscipe m. _house (e.g. of Israel)_, _race_.

hûsstede m. _site of a house_, #Lcd#.

hûsting n. _tribunal, court (esp. in London)_, _Chr_. ['_husting_']

hûsul = hûsl

hûsul- = hûs(e)l-

hûswist f. _home_, #LPs# 5^8.

hûð f. _plunder, booty, prey_, Æ.

hûx == hûsc

hwâ mf., hwæt n. pron. (interrog.) _'who,' what_, Æ, AO, CP: (indef.)
_any one, some one, anything, something_, Æ, AO, CP: _each_. swâ hwâ swâ
_whosoever_. swâ hwæt swâ _whatsoever_. tô hw¯æm _wherefore_.

+hwâ _each one, every one, any one, whoever_.

+hw¯æde _slight, scanty, small, young_, Æ.

hwæder (CP) = hwider

+hw¯ædnes f. _fewness, insignificance_: _fineness, subtlety_.

hw¯æg (ê) n? '_whey_,' LL.

hwæl I. (usu. hwal-in obl. cases) m. _'whale,' walrus_, Æ, AO. II. pret.
3 sg. of hwelan. III. = hwall. IV. (#Ex# 161) = wæln?

hwælan _like a whale_? #Sol# 263.

hwælhunta m. _whale-fisher, whaler_, Æ, AO.

hwælhuntað m. _whale-fishery, whaling_, AO.

hwælmere ¶ m. _sea_.

hwælweg (wæl-) m. _sea_, #Seaf# 63.

hwæm = hwemm

hw¯æm ds. of hwâ, hwæt.

+hw¯æmlic _each, every_, LkL 9^23.

-hw¯ænan v. â-hw.

hwæne = hwone, asm. of hwâ.

hw¯æne = hwêne

hwænne, hwæne ('_when_') = hwonne

hwær == hwer

hw¯ær (â) adv. and conj. _'where,' whither_, Æ: _somewhere, anywhere,
everywhere_, Æ, CP. wel h. _nearly everywhere_. swâ hw. swâ
_wheresoever, wherever_. elles hw. _elsewhere_. hw¯ær...hw¯ær
_here...there_.

+hw¯ær _everywhere, in all directions_, Æ: _on every occasion, always_.

hwærf == hwearf

hwærfan = hwierfan

hwærflung = hwyrflung

hwæs I. _sharp, piercing_, #Cr# 1444. II. gs. of hwâ, hwæt.

hw¯æsan^7 (ê) _to 'wheeze,' breathe hard_, Æ.

hw¯æst? _blowing_, v. OEG 2452n.

hw¯æstrian (â) _to murmur, mutter_, NG.

hw¯æstrung (â) f. _murmur, whispering, muttering_.

hwæt I. (neut. of hwâ, which see) adv. _why, wherefore_: _indeed,
surely, truly, for_: interj. _what! lo!_ (calls attention to a following
statement) _ah! behold!_ Æ. II. adj. (obl. cases have hwat-) _sharp,
brisk, quick, active_: _bold, brave_, AO. III. (CP) pres. 3 sg. of
hwettan.

+hwæt (_Cr_) neut. of +hwâ. ['_i-hwat_']

hw¯æte (ê) m. _'wheat,' corn_, Æ, CP. [hwît]

hwætêadig _very brave_, #El# 1195?

hw¯ætecorn n. _corn of wheat_, #Lcd# 13a.

hw¯ætecynn n. _wheat_, #PPs# 147^3.

hw¯ætegryttan pl. _wheaten groats_, WW 141^20.

hw¯ætehealm m. _wheat straw_, #Lcd# 49a.

hw¯æteland m. _wheat-land_, KC 3·159^21.

hw¯ætemelu n. _wheat-meal_, #Lcd# 126a.

hw¯æten '_wheaten_,' Æ.

hw¯ætesmedma m. _wheat-meal_, #Lcd#.

hw¯ætewæstm m. _corn_, #CPs# 77^25.

hwæthwara = hwæthwugu

hwæt-hwugu, -hwigu, -hugu, -hwega, -hwegu, -hwygu pron. and adv.
_somewhat, slightly, a little, something_.

hwæt-hwugununges (CP), -hweganunges, -huguningas adv. _somewhat_.

hwætlîce adv. _quickly, promptly_.

hwætmôd ¶ _bold, courageous_.

±hwætnes f. _quickness, activity_.

hwætrêd § _firm, determined_. [rêd = r¯æd]

hwætscipe m. _activity, vigour, boldness, bravery_, AO, CP.

hwæðer (e) I. adj. pron. _which of two, 'whether,'_ Æ. swâ hw. swâ
_whichever_. hwæðer...ðe _whether...or_: _each of two, both_: _one of
two, either_, CP. II. conj. (with subj.) and adv. _whether_, Æ, CP.

+hwæðer _both, either, each_.

hwæðere, hwæð(ð)re I. adv. _however, yet, nevertheless, still_, Æ, AO,
CP. II. = hwæðer adv.

+hwæðere _nevertheless_.

+hwæðeres _everywhere_.

hwal- v. hwæl.

hwalf = hwealf I.

hwall (= æ) _forward, bold_, WW 499^17; 532^32. [hwelan]

hwâm ds. of hwâ, hwæt.

hwamm (o) m. _corner, angle, prominence_, Æ, CP: _porch_.

hwamstân (o^1) m. _corner-stone_, MtL 21^42.

hwan = hwon instr. of hwæt.

hwân = hwâm

hwanan = hwanon

hwane = hwone asm. of hwâ.

hwanne = hwonne

hwanon, hwanone adv. _whence_, Æ.

+hwanon adv. _from every quarter_.

hwanonhwegu adv. _from anywhere_.

hwâr, hwâra = hw¯ær

hwâst- = hw¯æst-

hwasta? m. _eunuch_, Mt, WW.

hwat- v. hwæt.

hwat-a I. m. _augur, soothsayer_, Æ. II. (æ), -an fpl. _augury,
divination_.

hwatend '_iris Illyrica_' (_plant_).

hwatung f. _augury, divination_, LL.

hwêal (WW 162^25) = ðwêal

hwealf I. _concave, hollow, arched, vaulted_. II. f. _vault_. [cp.
_Ger._ gewölbe]

hwealhafoc = wealhhafoc  [[headword spelled "-hâfoc"]]

hwealp = hwelp

hwearf I. ¶ m. _crowd, troop, concourse_. [hweorfan] II. (a, e, eo) m.
_exchange_: _what is exchanged_: (+) _vicissitude_: _error_, MtR 27^64:
_going, distance_, LkLR 24^13. III. pret. 3 sg. of hweorfan.

hwearfan = hwierfan

hwearfian _to turn, roll or toss about, revolve, wave_, CP: _change_:
_wander, move, pass by_, AO.

hwearflic _changing, mutable, transitory_: _quick, agile_, #Fin# 35?
adv. -lîce _in turn_.

+hwearfnes f. _conversion_, CP 447^13.

hwearft m. _revolution, circuit, circle_: _lapse (of time)_.

hwearftlian (y) _to revolve, turn round_, Æ.

hwearfung f. _revolution_: _change, vicissitude_: _exchange_.

hwebbung = webbung

hweder = hwider

+hwêdnes (#KGl#) = +hw¯ædnes

hwêg = hw¯æg

hwegl = hwêol

hwelan^4 (y) _to roar, rage_.

hwelc (AO, CP) == hwilc

±hwelian, hwellan? _to suppurate_, CP: _cause to suppurate_.

hwelp (ea, y) m. _'whelp,' the young of an animal, cub_, AO.

hwelung f. _din_, WW 423^20.

hwem = hwemm

hwemdragen _sloping, slanting_, #Bl# 207^17.

hwemm (æ) m. _corner, angle_, Æ. [hwamm]

hwemman _to bend, turn, incline_, #Chr# 1052.

hwêne (¯æ) adv. _somewhat, a little_, Æ, AO, CP. [instr. of hwôn]

hweogl = hwêol

hwêol, hweogul, hweohl n. '_wheel_,' #Bo#; Mdf.

hwêolfâg _having a circular border or decoration_, WW 375^32.

hwêollâst m. _orbit_, DHy 93^17.

hwêolrâd f. _rut_, Cp 233#o#.

hwêop pret. 3 sg. of hwôpan.

+hweorf _converted_, MtR 18^3 (+werf): _active_? #Cra# 68.

hweorfa m. _whorl of a spindle_.

±hweorfan^3 (o, u) _to turn, change_. feohtan mid hweorfendum sigum _to
fight with varying success_, AO: _move, go, come_: _wander about, roam,
go about_: _turn back, return, turn from, depart_: _die_: _be
converted_.

hweorfbân (u, y) n. _joint, kneecap_.

hweorfian (e) _to return_, AS.

hwêos pret. 3 sg. of hw¯æsan.

hweoða = hwiða

hweowl, hweowol = hwêol

hwer (æ, y) m. _pot, basin, bowl, kettle, caldron_, Æ.

+hwêr = +hw¯ær

hwerbân = hweorfbân

hwerf I. m. _'wharf,' dam or bank to keep out water_, EC 299. II. =
hwearf

hwerf- = hwearf-, hweorf-, hwierf-

hwergen adv. only in phr. elles hwergen _elsehere_.

hwerhwette f. _cucumber_.

hwêsan (Æ) = hw¯æsan

hwêt == w¯æt

hwête (#KGl#) = hw¯æte

hwete-, hwet-stân m. _whetstone_, AO.

±hwettan _to 'whet,' sharpen, incite, encourage_, Æ, CP. [hwæt]

-hwette v. hwer-h.

hweðer = hwæðer

hweðre = hwæðere

hwî = hwý

hwicce f. _locker, chest, trunk_, OEG 18b^11.

hwicung f. _squeaking (of mice)_, GD 185^4 (#c#).

hwider (æ) adv. '_whither_,' Æ, AO, CP. swâ hw. swâ _wherever,
whithersoever_.

+hwider _in every direction, everywhere, anywhere, whithersoever_.

hwiderryne adj. _directed whither_, Ln 43^33.

hwîe = hwý

-hwielfan (e, y) v. â-, be-, of-hw. [hwealf]

±hwierfan (æ, e, ea, i, y) _to turn, change, convert, return_, _CP_:
_wander, move, go, depart_, AO: _exchange, barter_: (+) _overturn,
destroy_. [hwearf]

+hwierfednes (y) f. _conversion_, BH.

-hwierfere v. pening-hw.  [[headword spelled "-hwyrfere"]]

hwig = hwý

hwîl f. _'while,' time_, Æ, CP: _a long time_. hwîle (ðe) _while,
whilst, meanwhile_. nû hwîle _just now, a while ago_. ealle hwîle _all
the while_. ôðre hwîle...ôðre hwîle _at one time...at another time_.

hwilc (e, y) interrog. pron. and adj. _which, what_: (indef.)
_whosoever, whichever_: _any (one)_, _some (one)_. swâ hw. swâ
_whosoever, whatever_.

+hwilc _each, every (one)_, _all, many, whoever, whatever_. ânra +hw.
_each one_.

hwilchwega = hwilchwugu

hwilc-hwene, -hwone pron. _some, some one_.

hwilc-hwugu, -hugu (hwilc is declined) pron. _any, some, some one_,
AO, CP.

±hwilcnes f. _quality_, Æ.

hwîlen _passing, transitory_, #Whale# 87.

hwîlende (#Sc#), hwîlendlic (CP) = hwîlwendlic

hwileð pres. 3 sg. of hwelan.

hwîlhwega adv. _for some time_.

hwîlon (Æ) = hwîlum

hwilpe f. _curlew_? #Seaf# 21. [_Du._ wilp]

hwîlsticce n. _interval, short space of time, odd moment_, WW 420^28, GD
254^24.

hwîltîdum adv. _sometimes, at times_, Æ, CP. hwîltîdum...hwîltîdum _at
some times...at others_.

hwîlðrâg f. _period of time_, GD 243^19.

hwîlum adv. (dp. of hwîl) _'whilom,' sometimes, once_, Æ, CP.
hwîlum...hwîlum _now...now, at one time...at another_. ['_whilom_']

hwîlwende _transitory, temporary_, Æ.

hwîlwendlic _transitory, temporary, temporal_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ.

hwimpel = wimpel

hwînan^1 _to hiss, whizz, whistle_. ['_whine_']

hwinsian _to whine_, NC 303.

hwinsung f. _whining_, NC 303.

hwirfan = hwierfan

hwirfð pres. 3 sg. of hweorfan.

hwîrlic (#HGl# 434) = hwearflic

hwiscettung f. _squeaking (of mice)_, GD 185^4 (#o#).

hwisprian _to 'whisper,' murmur_, NG.

hwisprung f. _whispering, murmuring_, JnR 7^12.

hwistle f. _reed, whistle, pipe_.

hwistlere m. _whistler, piper_.

hwistlian _to 'whistle,' hiss_, #Nar# 43^17.

hwistlung f. _whistling, piping, music_.

hwît I. '_white_': _bright, radiant, glistening, flashing, clear, fair_.
II. n. _white of egg_, Æ.

±hwîtan _to whiten_: _brighten, polish_.

hwîtcorn n. _manna_, JnL 6^31mg.

hwît-cwidu, -cudu m. _mastic_, #Lcd#.

hwîtehlâf m. _white bread_.

hwîtel (ý) m. _blanket, cloak_, Æ. [hwît]

hwîtfôt _white-footed_, #Gl#.

hwîtian _to whiten, become white, be white_, Æ.

hwîtingmelu n. _whiting-powder_, #Lcd# 119b.

hwîtingtrêow n. _whitten tree_.

hwîtlêac n. _onion_, WW 353^8.

hwîtling m. _a kind of fish, whiting_? NC 303.

hwît-loc §, -loccede § _fair-haired, blonde_, #Rd#.

hwîtnes f. _whiteness_, Æ, #Bl#.

hwiða m., hwiðu (eo) f? _air, breeze_, Æ, CP.

hwol? '_infigens_,' OEG 37^6.

hwomm = hwamm

hwon form of instr. case of hwâ, only found in adverbial phrases like
'tô hwon, for hwon' _why_.

hwôn I. adj. _little, few_. II. n. _a little, trifle, somewhat, a little
while_. III. adv. _somewhat_.

hwonan = hwanon

hwone asm. of hwâ.

hwônlic _little, small_, Æ. adv. -lîce, _moderately, slightly,
little_, Æ.

hwônlotum (= -hlotum) adv. _in small quantities_, #Gl#.

hwonne adv. _when, then, at some time_, CP: _at any time_. nû hw. _just
now_: _as long as, until_.

hwonon = hwanon

hwôpan^7 ¶ _to threaten_.

hworfan = hweorfan

hwôsta m. _cough_, _WW_. ['_hoast_?']

hwôstan _to cough_, #Lcd# 96b (hwôsað).

hwoðerian _to foam, surge_, ÆH 2·388^19. [hwiða]

hwoðrung f. _murmur, a low sound_, OEG 26^14.

hwu (LWS) = hû

hwugud¯æl m. _small part_, HL 18^346.

hwurf- = hwearf-, hweorf-, hwyrf-

hwurfon pret. pl. of hweorfan.

hwurful _fickle_, CP. [hweorfan]

hwurfulnes f. _inconstancy, mutability_, CP.

hwý (inst. of hwæt) adv. and conj. '_why_.' tô hwý _wherefore_.

hwyder (Æ) = hwider

hwylan = hwelan

hwylc == hwilc

hwylca m. _tumour, boil_, WW 161^17.

hwýlon = hwîlum

hwylp = hwelp

hwyr = hwer

hwyrf- = hweorf-, hwierf-

hwyrfel m. _circuit, exterior, higher part_? #Bl# 125^21: (_meaning
doubtful_), EC 328´.

hwyrfepôl m. _whirlpool, eddy_, WW 383^34.

hwyrflede '_rotundus_,' v. OEG 23^42.

hwyrflung (æ) f. _turning, revolution, month_? v. OEG 1992: _wandering_.

hwyrfnes f. _dizziness, giddiness_, #Lcd#.

±hwyrft m. _turning, circuit, revolution, motion, course, orbit_: _way
out, outlet_. +hw. gêares _anniversary_.

hwyrftlian = hwearftlian

hwyrftweg m. _escape_, #Rd# 4^6.

hwystl- = wistl-

hwýtel = hwîtel

hý = hîe

+hýan = hêan III.

±hycgan (i) _to think, consider, meditate, study_: _resolve upon,
determine, purpose_: _remember_: _hope_. h. fram _be averse to_.

hýd I. _'hide,' skin_, _Chr, LL_; AO, CP, Æ. hýde ðolian _to undergo a
flogging_. II. = hîd

+hýd I. _furnished with a skin_, #Nar# 50^5. II. pp. of hêan. III. =
+hygd

±hýdan I. _to 'hide' ('i-hede'), conceal, preserve_, _Bo, CP_: (refl.
and intr.) _hide oneself_, _CP, Ps_: _sheath (a sword)_, _bury
(a corpse)_, Æ. II. = hêdan

hýddern = hêddern

-hydele v. h¯æwen-h.

+hýdelicnes = +hýðelicnes

hýdels m. _hiding-place, cave_, _MkR, LL_. ['_hidels_']

hyder = hider

hýdgild (y^2) n. _fine to save one's skin (i.e. instead of flogging)_,
_LL_. ['_hidegild_']

hýdig I. _leathern_, WW 125^35. II. = hygdig

+hýdnes f. _comfort_, Cp 210#o#: _security_, CP 387.

hýdscip = hýðscip

hýf f. '_hive_,' _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

+hygd (i), hygd (at #PPs# 120^4) fn. _mind, thought_: _reflection,
forethought_.

hygdig _heedful, thoughtful, careful_: _chaste, modest_. adv. -lîce
_chastely_.

hygdignes f. _chastity, modesty_, DR.

hyge (i) ¶ m. _thought, mind, heart, disposition, intention_, _Seaf,
Da_: _courage_: _pride_, #Gen# 354. ['_high_']

hygebend mf. _heart-strings_, B 1878.

hygeblind _mentally blind_, #Jul# 61.

hygeblîðe ¶ _blithe of heart, glad, joyful_.

hygecl¯æne _pure in heart_, #PPs# 104^3.

hygecræft ¶ m. _power of mind, wisdom_.

hygecræftig ¶ _wise, prudent_.

hýgedriht f. _band of household retainers_? #Rim# 21. [hîw]

hygefæst _wise_, #Rd# 43^14.

hygefrôd _wise_, #Gen# 1953.

hygefrôfor ¶ f. _consolation_.

hygeg¯ælsa _hesitating, slow, sluggish_, #Ph# 314. [g¯ælan]

hygegâl _loose, wanton_, #Rd# 13^12.

hygegâr m. _wile_, #Mod# 34.

hygegêomor ¶ _sad in mind_.

hygeglêaw ¶ _prudent in mind_.

hygegrim _savage, cruel_, #Jul# 595.

hygelêas (e, i) _thoughtless, foolish, rash_, Æ.

hygelêaslic (i) _unbridled_, OEG 3170.

hygelêast f. _heedlessness, folly_, Æ.

hygem¯æðum (i) _reverently_, B 2909.

hygemêðe _sad, saddening_, B 2442.

hygerôf ¶ _stout-hearted, brave_.

hygerûn f. _secret_, #El# 1099.

hygesceaft f. _mind, heart_, #Gen# 288.

hygesnottor ¶ _sagacious, wise_.

hygesorg ¶ f. _heart sorrow, anxiety_.

hygestrang (i) _brave_, #Men# 42.

hygetêona ¶ m. _injury, insult_.

hygetrêow f. _fidelity_, #Gen# 2367.

hygeðanc ¶ m. _thought_.

hygeðancol ¶ _thoughtful, wise_.

hygeðihtig (i^1) _courageous_, B 746.

hygeðrymm (i^1) m. _courage_, B 339.

hygeðrýð (i) f. _pride, insolence_, #Gen# 2238.

hygewælm § m. _agitation of mind, anger_.

hygewlanc ¶ _haughty, proud_.

hyggean = hycgan

hýglâ (#LPs#) = hîglâ

hýhsan = hýscan  [[headword spelled "hyscan"]]

hýhst v. hêah.

hyht (e, i) mf. (±) _hope, trust_, _Bl, Ps_; Æ, CP: _joy, exultation_:
(±) _desire, expectation_: (+) _comfort_. ['_hight_']

±hyhtan (i) _to hope, trust_, _Ps_: _rejoice, exult, be glad_: _soften
(hardship)_, #Guth# 86^8. ['_hight_']

+hyhtendlic _to be hoped for_, GD 269^13.

hyhtful (e, i) _hopeful_: _full of joy, mirthful, pleasant, glad_.

hyhtgiefu f. _pleasing gift_, #Rim# 21.

hyhtgifa m. _giver of joy_, #El# 852.

hyhting (i^1) f. _exultation_, WW 233^42.

hyhtlêas (i^1) _unbelieving_, #Gen# 2387.

hyhtlic ¶ _hopeful, joyful, pleasant_. adv. -lîce.

+hyhtlic _commodious_.

hyhtplega ¶ m. _joyous play, sport_.

hyhtwilla ¶ m. _hoped-for joy_.

hyhtwynn ¶ f. _joy of hope, joy_.

hýhðo = hîehðu

hyl = hyll

hylc (i) m. _bend, turn_, #Gl#.

+hylced _divergent_, GPH 398.

hyld (e, i) m. _grace_, _Gen_: _loyalty, fidelity_, _Chr_ (e), _LL_.
['_held_']

hyldan I. (e) = hieldan. II. _to flay, skin_, _Æ, WW_. ['_hild_';
hold II.]

hyldâð m. _oath of allegiance_, LL 396#b#.

hylde f. _declivity, slope_, _KC, WW_ (e). ['_hield_']

+hyldelic _secure, safe_, GD 348^10.

hyldem¯æg ¶ m. _near kinsman_.

hyldere m. _flayer, butcher_, #Gl#. [hold II.]

+hyldig _patient_, #SPs# 7^12.

hylding f. _curve, inclination_, WW 382^2. [heald]

hyldo f. _favour, grace, kindness, protection_: _allegiance, loyalty,
reverence_, AO, CP. [hold I.]

hyldr¯æden f. _fidelity_, TC 610^31 (e^1).

hyldu (Æ) = hyldo

hylest pres. 2 sg. of helan.

hylf (Æ) = hielf

hyll I. mf. '_hill_,' _Æ_; Mdf. II. = hell

hyllehâma (i) m. _'cicada,' cricket, grasshopper_, #Gl#.

+hylman = helmian

-hylman v. for-, ofer-h.  [["oferhylman" only in form "oferhylmend"]]

hylp = help

hylpð pres. 3 sg. of helpan.

hylsten _baked (on the hearth)_, WW 393^31.

hylsung f. _'tympanum,' timbrel_? (BB 4·82), #EPs# 150^4.

hylt = hielt pres. 3 sg. of healdan.

-hylte v. hêah-h.

hylto = hielto

hylwyrt f. _'hillwort,' pulegium_, _WW_.

hym = him

hymblice (#Gl#) = hymlic

Hymbre sbpl. _Northumbrians_, OET 571.

hymele f. _hop plant_, WW; Mdf. [_L._ humulus]

hymelic = hymlic

hýmen = ýmen  [[headword spelled "ymen"]]

hymlic (e) m., hymlîce f. '_hemlock_,' _Gl, Lcd, WW_.

hýn = hêan

hýnan (Æ) = hîenan

hynd == hind

-hynde v. six-, twelf-, twi-h.; of-hende.

hynden f. _community of 100 men_, LL.

hyndenmann m. _chief man in the community of 100 men_, LL 175; 178.

hyne = hine as. of hê.

±hyngran, hyngrian (i) _to be hungry, 'hunger,'_ (impers.) _Æ, JnL_;
(intr.) _Cr, Lk_: (trans.) _hunger for_, Mt 5^6.

hyngrig = hungrig

hýnnes f. _persecution_, BH 34^5. [hêan]

hynnil¯æc (Ep) = ynnilêac  [[under "ynnelêac"]]

hýnð, hýnðu = hîenðo

+hýpan (Æ) = +hêapian

hypbân n. _hip-bone_, WW 201^9.

hype m. '_hip_,' _Bl, WW_; Æ, CP.

hýpe f. _heap_, Æ.

hypebân = hypbân

hýpel m. _heap, mound_, _Gl_.

hypesex = hupseax

+hypsan (#LPs# 9^25) = hyspan

hypwærc (i^1, e^2) n. _pain in the hips_, WW 113^15.

hýr (î) f. _'hire,' wages_, _Æ, LL_: _interest, usury_, Æ.

hyra gp. of hê, hêo, hit.

hýra m. _servant, follower, mercenary, hireling_, CP.

hyran _to spit_, MkR 14^65. [cp. +horian]

±hýran = (1) hîeran; (2) hýrian

hyrcnian = heorcnian

hyrd f. _door_, #Gen# 2695. [_Goth._ haúrds]

hyrd-, heord-, hyrwd- = hierd-

hyrdel m. '_hurdle_,' _Æ, WW_.

hyre gds. of hêo.

hýre = hêore

hýreborg (îe) m. _interest an money_, WW 515^1.

hýred = hîered

hýrefter = hêræfter

hýre-geoc, -geoht = hýrgeoht

hýregilda m. _mercenary, hired servant_, WW 111^11.

hýremann = hîeremann  [[headword spelled "hîereman"]]

hýrgeoht n. _hired yoke of oxen_, LL 24[60].

hyrian _to imitate_, #Bo#.

hýrian _to 'hire' ('i-hire')_, _Æ, Mt_.

hýrigmann I. m. _hireling_, _A, Mk_. ['_hireman_'] II. = hîeremann
  [[headword spelled "hîereman"]]

hyring f. _imitation_.

hýrling m. '_hireling_,' _Mk_ 1^20.

hýrmann = hýrigmann

hyrnan _to jut out like a horn_, Ct.

hyrne f. _angle, corner_, _CP, Mt_; Mdf. ['_hern_']

±hyrned _horned, beaked_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_i-horned_']

hyrnednebba ¶ _horny-billed, horn-beaked_. [horn]

hyrnen I. _of horn_, #LRPs# 97^6. II. _angular_, OEG 7^20.

hýrnes = hîernes

hyrnet, hyrnetu f. '_hornet_,' _Gl, WW_: _gadfly_? _WW_ 121^12.

hyrnful _angular, having many angles_, OEG 121.

hyrnig _angular_, OEG 121.

hyrnstân m. _corner-stone, keystone_, ÆH 1·106.

hýroxa m. _hired ox_, LL 116#b#.

hyrra (#KGl#) = heorra, heorr

hýrra I. v. hêah. II. = hýra

hyrst ¶ I. f. (±) _ornament, decoration, jewel, treasure_:
_accoutrements, trappings, armour_. [_Ger._ rüstung] II. m. _hillock,
eminence, height, wood, wooded eminence_, _Rd, OET_; Mdf. ['_hurst_']

hyrst- = hierst-

±hyrstan I. _to decorate, adorn, ornament, equip_. [_Ger._ rüsten] II.
(+) _to murmur_, LkLR 15^2. III. = hierstan

hýrsum == hîersum

hyrtan = hiertan

hyrten = heorten

hyrð f. _skin, hide_, ES 41·323.

hyrðil (_Cp_) = hyrdel

+hýrung f. _hiring_, WW 213^12.

hyrw- = hierw-

hys = his

hýsan ?= hýscan  [[headword spelled "hyscan"]]

±hyscan (ea, i) (tr.) _to jeer at, deride, reproach_, _Jul, Ps_: (intr.)
_to rail, utter taunts_, _W_. ['_heascen_']

  [[Spelled "hýscan" in 3 of 5 cross-references, and in compound
  onhýscan; first edition also has "hýscan".]]

hýscend (î) m. _reviler_, GPH 398.

hyscild (WW 170^12) = hysecild

hyse ¶ nap. hyssas m. _son, youth, young man, warrior_.

hysebeorðor n. _the bearing of male offspring_: _boy, young man_.

hyse-berðling, -byrding m. _the bearing of male offspring_.

hyseberðre f. _woman who bears a son_, SHy 50^17. [byrðere]

hysecild n. _male child_, Æ, AO.

hyserinc m. _young man_, GD 338^22.

hysewîse adv. _after the manner of young men_, WW 417^35.

hysope = ysope

hyspan (e, i) pret. hyspde and hyspte _to mock, scorn, deride, revile_,
AO. [hosp]

hyspend m. _calumniator_, #RPs# 71^4.

+hyspendlic _abominable_, #LPs# 13^1.

hyspful _ridiculous_, OEG 11^180.

hysp-nes, -ung f. _contumely_.

hysse = hyse

hyt I. f. _heat_, B 2649. [_ON._ hita; or ? read hât] II. = hit pron.

hýt pres. 3 sg. of hýdan.

hyttan = hittan

hýð I. f. _landing-place, harbour, creek, port_, _Cp, Guth, Met, Ps_; Æ,
CP. ['_hithe_'] II. f. _booty, prey_.

+hýð _appropriate, convenient_, Æ.

hýðan (î) _plunder, ravage_. [hûð]

±hýðegian _to facilitate_.

hýðegung f. _advantage_, #Sc# 12^6.

±hýðelic _suitable, proper, convenient, advantageous_. adv. -lîce.

+hýðelicnes f. '_opportunitas_,' NC 345.

hýðgild n. _harbour offering, sacrifice or service_, OEG.

hýðlic _belonging to a harbour_, WW.

+hýðlic = +hýðelic

+hýðnes f. _advantage_, ÆL 23b^252: _occasion_, #EPs# 9^27.

hýðscip (î) n. _a light, piratical vessel_, #Gl#.

hýðð f. _gain, advantage_.

+hyððo n. _subsistence_, ÆL 23b^492.

hýðweard m. _warden of a harbour_, B 1915.

hýw == hîw

+hýwan = +îewan

hýxan = hýscan  [[headword spelled "hyscan"]]




=I=


îa (Æ) = gêa

îacessûre = gêacessûre

îacinctus, îacintus m. _jacinth_, CP. [_L._ hyacinthus]

îagul = gêagl

iara = gearo

iarwan = gierwan

îb- = îf-

ic pron. (1st pers.) '_I_,' _Cp, Jn_. [_Ger._ ich]

îcan, icean = îecan

îce = ýce

îcend m. '_auctor_,' #ÆGr# 48^12. [îecan]

îcestre f. '_auctrix_,' #ÆGr# 48^12.

icge only in phr. 'icge gold,' _treasure-gold_? _rich gold_? B 1108.

îdæges adv. _on the same day_, Æ.

îdel I. (often îdl- in obl. cases) _worthless, useless, vain_, _Æ, Cp,
Gen, Mt, VPs_: _empty, desolate, bare, void, destitute, devoid (of)_,
_Æ, B, VPs_; CP: _'idle,' unemployed_, _Mt_. on î. adv. _in vain_, _Æ_.
II. n. _emptiness, frivolity, idleness_, _Lcd, LL, Sol_ (ý):
_inattention, carelessness_.

îdelgeorn _slothful, idle_.

îdelgielp (e^3, i^3) n. _empty boasting, vainglory_, CP, DHy, WW.

îdelgild n. _vain worship, idolatry_, Æ.

îdelgildoffrung f. _offering to an idol_, Æ.

îdelhende _empty-handed, empty_, Æ, CP.

îdelinga (a^2) '_frivola_,' GPH 389.

îdellic _vain, idle_. adv. -lîce, _VPs_. ['_idly_']

îdelnes f. _frivolity, vanity, emptiness, falseness_, _VPs_; CP. in (on)
îdelnisse _in vain_: _'idleness,' idle, vain existence_, _LL_.

-îdelspr¯æce v. fela-î.

ides _virgin_: (¶) _woman, wife, lady, queen_.

idig _busy_? _active_? (BT); _greedy for_? _desirous of_? (GK), #Ph#
407?

îdl- v. îdel.

±îdlian _to become useless_.

îdol n. _idol_, LL. [_L._]

îe v. êa.

îecan (¯æ, ê, êa, î, ý) pret. îecte, îhte _to increase, enlarge, add to,
augment, prolong_, _An, Lcd, Lk_ (î): (+) _fulfil, carry out_, RSL
11·486. ['_eche_'; êac]

îecinctus = îacinctus

îecsesûre = gêacessûre

îedel- = îdel-

îeg (îg) f. _island_. [êa]

îegbûend m. _islander_, CP.

îegclif (êg-) n. _sea-cliff_, B 2893.

îegland (ê, î) n. _island_.

îegstrêam (ê^1) ¶ m. _current, river, sea_.

îehtan = êhtan

ielc- = ilc-

ield = ieldo

±ieldan (i, y) _to delay, put off, prolong, hesitate, tarry_, _CP_:
_connive at, dissimulate_. ['_eld_'; eald]

ieldcian (CP) = elcian

ielde ¶ (e, ea, i, y) mp. _men_.

ielden (æ) n. _delay_, BH 400^20.

ieldend (y) m. _one who delays_.

ieldendlic (e) _dilatory_, WW 441^2.

ieldest (æ, e, y) superl. of eald (_Æ, Mt, CP_; '_eldest_').

ieldesta m. _chief_.

ieldful (i, y) _dilatory, delaying_, OEG.

ieldian (y) _to put off, delay_, Æ.

ielding f. _delay, tarrying_, CP: _dissimulation_.

ieldo (æ, e, i, y) f. _age_, _Æ, Gu, Lcd_: _period_: _old age, old
people_, _Æ, Bl_; CP: _an age of the world_, _Æ, Gu_. ['_eld_'; eald]

ieldra (y) (comp. of eald) used as sbpl. _parents, ancestors_, _B, Bo,
El, Rd_. ['_elder_']

ieldrafæder (æld-) m. _grandfather_, WW 7^34.

ieldu = ieldo

ielfe (y) mp. _elves_ (v. ælf).

ielfen (æ, e, y) f. _elf, fairy_.

ielfig (y) _raving, frantic, mad_, WW. [v. '_giddy_']

iêmung (WW 277^22) = gêmung

ierd = gierd

ierf- v. also yrf-.

ierfe (æ, e, i, y) n. _heritage, bequest, property_, CP: _cattle_.
[_Ger._ erbe]

ierfian (i) _to inherit, possess_: (+) _to stock with cattle_.

iergan _to dishearten_. [earg]

iergðu f. _remissness, sloth, cowardice_, AO. [earg]

ierlic (i) _angry, vehement_, #ApT#.

±ierman _to harass, vex, afflict_, CP. [earm]

ierming (eo, e, y) m. _person of no account, poor wretch_, AO, CP.

iermð, iermðu (e, ea, eo, y) f. _misery, distress, poverty_, _B, Bo,
Ps_: _disease_: _crime_: _reproach, calumny_, #CPs# 118^134. ['_ermth_';
earm]

iernan^3 (æ, i, y; rinnan) pret. 3 sg. arn, orn, pl. urnon; pp. urnen
(±) _to run, move rapidly, hasten, flow, spread_, _Æ, AO, CP, Lcd, VPs_:
_pursue_, _Bo, Ps_: _cause to move rapidly, turn, grind_, _AO, BH_: (+)
_get to, attain, meet with_: (+) _occur (to one's mind)_, GD: (+)
_coagulate_, _Lcd_: (+) _grow up_. ['_ern_']

ierning (e) f. _discharge, flow_, NG.

ierre I. (i, y) _wandering, erring, perverse, depraved_, _Ps, Sol_:
_angry, fierce_, _Æ, Bl, Chr, CP_; AO. II. n. _anger_, _Bl, CP, El, Lk_.
['_irre_']

ierremôd (y) _wrathful, wild_, B 726.

ierrenga (eo^1, y^1, i^2, u^2) adv. _angrily, fiercely_, CP.

ierreðweorh (y) _very angry_, #Sat# 399?

ierscipe (y) m. _anger_, #LPs# 9^25.

±iersian (i, io, y) _to be angry with, rage_: _enrage, irritate_, CP.

iersigendlic _passionate, emotional_, Æ (y).

iersung (i, y) f. _anger_, CP.

iersunga adv. _angrily_.

ierð- = eorð-, yrð-

iesca (Ep, Erf) = geocsa

iesend, iesende _entrails_, WW. [= gesen]

ieteð pres. 3 sg. of etan.

îeð adv. comp. (= êað) _easily_, _An, Met_; AO, CP. ['_eath_']

+îeðan (ê) _to alleviate_, #Gu# 1179: _compassionate_, GD 216 (ý).

îeðe I. _easy, good-natured, pleasant_, _B_; AO. II. (¶) = êðe

îeðegean = ýðgian

îeðelic _easy_, CP: adv. -lîce _easily_, AO, CP.

îeðnes f. _ease, pleasure_, CP 425^11.

±îewan (êa, êo, ý) _to show, display, reveal, disclose, point out_, CP.
[êage; cp. êowan]

îfegn = îfig

îfig n. '_ivy_,' _Gl, Lcd, Shr_.

îfigbearo _ivy-grove_, CC 50.

îfig-crop, -croppa m. _cluster of ivy berries_.

îfiglêaf n. _ivy leaf_, #Lcd# 117b.

îfig-tearo, -tara n. _ivy tar, resin from tar_, #Lcd#.

îfiht _ivy-covered_, KC.

ig = ic

îg = îeg

îgbûend = îegbûend

igdæges = îdæges

igel = îl

igg = îeg

iggað, iggoð, îg(e)oð m. _'ait,' eyot, small island_, _Æ, Chr_.

igil, igl (Æ) = îl

îgland (ê) n. '_island_,' _BH, Bo, Chr, Whale_.

îgoð, îgð = iggað

ih = ic

îhte pret. 3 sg. of îecan.

îl (igil) m. _hedgehog, porcupine_, _Shr, WW_; CP. ['_il_']

îland = îgland

ilca (y) pron. (always wk) _the same_, _An, Bo, Chr, OET_; CP. ['_ilk_']

ilce adv. v. swâ.

ild- = ield-

ile (y) m. _sole of the foot_, Æ: _callosity, corn_, Æ. [cp. _Ger._
eilen]

ilfetu, ilfe(t)te (y) f. _swan_, #Gl#; Mdf.

illca = ilca

illeracu f. _surfeit_, WW 378^15.

+illerocad _surfeited_, #CVPs# 77^65.

ilnetu (WW 367^27) = ilfetu

ilugsecg v. eolhsecg.

imbe = ymbe II.

imberdling, imbyrdling = inbyrdling

impa? m., impe? f. _graft, shoot, scion_, CP 381^17. ['_imp_']

impian _to 'imp,' implant, graft_, _LL_ 454[12]: (+) _busy oneself
with_, CP 132^25.

in I. prep. with a. and d. (instr.) (local) _'in,' into, upon, on, at,
to, among_: (temporal) _in, at, about, towards, during_: (purpose) _in,
to, for_. II. sb. and adv. = inn

in- (v. BH xxxiii ff.) = on-

inâberan^4 (inn-) _to bring in_, Æ.

inâdl f. _internal disease_, #Lcd#.

in¯ælan (#VPs#) = on¯ælan

inâgân = ingân

inâgêode = inêode pret. 3 sg. of ingân.

inâsendan _to send in_.

inâwritting f. _inscription_, LkL 20^24.

inbærnednes (#CPs# 66); inbærnes (#Gl#) f. _burning, incense,
frankincense_. [= onb-]

inbecweðan^5 _to inculcate_, WW 429^36.

inbel¯ædan _to lead in_.

inbelûcan^2 _to shut_, #Bl# 217^26.

inbend mf. _internal bond_, #Gu# 928.

inber- = on-, in-byr-

inberan _to carry in_, LL 386[1].

inbernes (#VPs#) = inbærnes  [[under "inbærnednes"]]

inbeslêan _to hack into (any one)_, LL 86[74].

inbestingan^3 _to penetrate_, LL 7[64,2].

inbetýnednes f. _life of a recluse_, GD 212^5.

inbewindan^3 _to enfold, enwrap_.

inbirdling = inbyrdling

inblâwan^7 _to inspire, breathe upon_, _JnR_: _inflate, puff up_, _EC_.
['_inblow_']

inboden _proclaimed_. [onbêodan]

inbolgen _exasperated_. [= onb-]

inboren ptc. _indigenous, native_, GPH 390. ['_inborn_']

inborh m. _bail, security in cases of theft_, _LL_. ['_inborgh_']

inbrêdan^3 _to burst in upon_, GPH 393.

in-brengan, -bringan _to bring in, present_, _Mk_. ['_inbring_']

inbryne (byr) m. _conflagration_.

inbryrd- = onbryrd-

inbûan _to inhabit_, MtL 23^21.

inbûend m. _inhabitant_, WW 210^13.

in-burg, -burh f. _hall_, WW.

inbyrde _born on the estate_, Ct.

inbyrdling (e) m. _slave born in a master's house_, Æ.

inbyrne (DR) = inbryne

inbyrð pres. 3 sg. of inberan.

inc (_Mt, Mk_) da. of git, dual pers. pron. ['_inc_']

inca m. _question, scruple, suspicion, doubt_: _grievance, quarrel,
grudge_, BH. incan witan _to have a grudge_.

incaðêode = ingeðêode  [[form of "ingeðêod"]]

ince = ynce

incêgan _to call upon_, DR 119^3. [cîgan]

incêgung f. _invocation_, DR.

incempa m. _soldier of the same company_, WW 207^6.

incer (y) I. gen. of git, dual pers. pron. II. adj. pron. _of or
belonging to both of you_, _Mt_. ['_inker_']

+incfullian _to offend, scandalize_, MtR. [inca]

incga = inca

incit acc. of git, dual personal pronoun.

incleofa (i, y) m. _chamber, closet_: _cave, den_.

incniht m. _household servant_, Æ.

incofa m. _inner chamber_, ÆL: _breast, heart_, #Met# 22^18.

incoðu f. _internal disease_, Æ.

incuman^4 _to come in, go into, enter_, _Æ_. ['_income_']

incund _interior, internal, inward, secret_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce, Æ.

incundnes f. _inward conviction, sincerity_, W 105^30: _inward part,
recess_, DHy.

incûð _strange, extraordinary_. adv. -lîce.

incyme m. _entrance_, LV 32.

ind¯ælan _to infuse_, DR.

indêpan _to dip in_, LkL 16^24.

Indisc _Indian_, Æ.

indrencan = ondrencan

indrîfan^1 _to ejaculate, utter_, #Sat# 80.

indrihten = indryhten

indrincan^3 _to imbibe, drink_. indruncen _plied with drink_.

indryhten _distinguished, noble, excellent_.

indryhto ¶ f. _honour, glory_.

ineardian _to dwell in, inhabit_, #VPs#.

inêddisc n. _household stuff, furniture_, WW 147^32. [ýddisc]

inelfe = innelfe

inerfe = innierfe

infær n. _ingress, entrance, entry_, _Æ, WW_. ['_infare_']

infæreld n. _in-coming, entrance_, Æ: _interior_: _vestibule_.

infangene-ðêof, infangen-ðêf sb. _right of judging thieves caught within
the limits of one's jurisdiction, and of taking the fines for the
crime_, _Ct_; v. LL 2·523. ['_infangthief_']

infaran^6 I. _to enter_, _Æ, Jn_. ['_infare_'] II. = innefaran

infaru f. _incursion, inroad_, #Chr# 1048.

infeallan^7 _to fall in_, #VPs#.

infeccan _to fetch in_, #Bl# 175^1.

infêran _to enter in_, Æ.

infiht n. _brawl in a house_, LL 597´.

infindan^3 _to find, discover_, NG.

inflêde ¶ _full of water_.

inflêon^2 _to fly from_, #Rim# 44.

infôster n. _bringing up, rearing_, LL 396´.

infrôd ¶ _very aged, experienced_.

ing I. _name of the rune for =ng=_. II. = ging, geong

-ing suffix, as in earming, lytling (originally patronymic).

in-gân anv. pret. -êode _to go in, enter_, _BH, Mt_. ['_ingo_']

ingang m. _ingress, entrance, access, beginning_, _BH, Ps_ (inn-):
_entrance fee_. ['_ingang_']

ingangan^7 _to go in, enter_, Æ.

ingebed n. _earnest prayer_, #PPs# 87^2.

ingeberigan (NG) = onbyrgan

ingebringan^3 _to bring in_, LL 150´.

inge-cîgan, -cêgan '_invocare_,' #VPs#; #CPs# 90^15.

ingedôn anv. _to put in_, BH 434^20.

ingedrincan (GPH 391) = indrincan

ingefeallan^7 '_incidere_,' #Ps#.

ingefeoht n. _internal war_, BH.

ingefolc n. _native race_, #Ex# 142.

ingehrif (-gerif) n. _womb_, #LPs# 21^8.

inge-hygd, -hýd (Æ), -hîd f. _consciousness, mind, conscience, sense,
understanding_: _intention, purpose, design_.

ingehygdnes f. _intention_, #LPs# 48^5.

ingel¯ædan = inl¯ædan

ingelaðian _to invite_.

ingemang v. gemang prep.

ingemynd ¶ fn. _recollection, memory, mind_.

ingemynde _well-remembered_, #El# 896.

ingenga m. _visitor, intruder_, B 1776.

ingeongan (NG) = ingangan

ingêotan^2 _to pour in, fill_.

ingêoting (yn- ?= ymb-) f. _inpouring_, OEG.

ingerec n. _broil_, BH. [= ungerec]

ingerif = ingehrif

ingeseted _placed in, inserted_.

ingesteald _household goods_, B 1155.

ingeswel n. _internal swelling_, WW 113^5.

ingeðanc mn. _thought, mind, conscience, intention_, Æ, CP.

ingeðêod ¶ f. _nation_.

ingeweaxen _implanted_, WW 427^8.

ingewinn n. _civil war_, AO 88^29.

ingewitnes f. _consciousness, conscience_, BH.

ingong (CP) = ingang

ingyte m. _pouring in, infusion, inspiration_, CM 424. [gêotan]

inh¯ætan _to inflame_, GD 29^9.

inhebban (#Cr# 313) = onhebban

inheldan = onhieldan

inheord f. _herd kept by the lord on his lands_, LL 449[7].

inhîred m. _family, household_, Æ.

in-hîwan, -hîgan sbpl. _members of a household or community, servants_.

inhold _loyal in heart_, #Lcd# 3·442^28.

inhýrnes f. _possession_, EC 364´.

inilfe = innelfe

ininnan = oninnan

inlâd f. _right of water-passage inland_: _entrance-fee_.

inl¯ædan _'inducere,' to introduce_, NG.

inlænd- = inlend-

±inlagian _to reverse sentence of outlawry_, _Chr, LL_. ['_inlaw_']

inland n. _land in the lord's own occupation, domain, demesne_.

inlaðian _to invite_.

inlaðigend m. _inviter_, #Sc# 170^12.

inlec = inlic

inlêgan (#VPs#) = onlîegan  [[error for "onlicgan"?]]

inlêhtan = inlîhtan

inlenda m. _native_, #Gl#.

in-lende, -lendisc _native, indigenous_.

inlêohtan = inlîhtan

inlic _internal, interior, inward_, _BH_: _native_. adv. -lîce
_inwardly_: _thoroughly, sincerely, heartily_, _BH, Bo_. ['_inly_']

inlîchomung f. _incarnation_, DR.

±inlîhtan (= on-) _to shine, illuminate, enlighten_.

inlîhtend m. _illuminator_, DR 2^6.

inlîhtian (= on-) _to illuminate, enlighten_, NG.

inlîhtnes f. _illumination_, #VPs#.

inliðewâc = unliðuwâc  [[headword spelled "unliðowâc"]]

inlîxan _to become light, dawn_, LkL 23^54.

inlocast superl. adv. _innermost, most heartily_. [inlîce]

inlýhtan = inlîhtan

inmearg n. _marrow_, GPH 397.

inmêde _close to one's heart, important in one's estimation_, RB;
#Bk# 15.

inn I. n. _dwelling, apartment, lodging, chamber, house_, _Æ, Mt_; AO:
_quartering oneself (of soldiers)_. ['_inn_'] II. adv. _in, inwards,
within, inside of_: _into_. inn on _into_.

inn- = in-

inna (LkL) = innoð

innan I. prep. (w. a. g. d.) _from within_, _B_: _within, in, into_, _G,
Gen, Lcd_; CP. II. adv. _within, inside, in_, _AO_. ['_inne_']

innanbordes adv. _(within borders), at home_, CP.

innanburhware sbpl. _residents within the walls of a town_, TC 510^31.

innancund _inner, inward, internal_: _thorough, hearty_.

innane = innan II.

innanweard = inweard

innað = innoð

innâwritting (_LkL_) = onwrîting

inne adv. _in, inside, within, in-doors_, _A, AO, BH, Chr, Ct, Lcd_.

inne- = inn-, in-

innecund adj. _inward_, CP 139.

inne-faran, -foran _bowels_, #Lcd#.

innelfe n. _bowels_: _womb_.

innemest (superl. of inne) adj. '_inmost_,' _Sc_: _most intimate, deep
or close_, _CP_. adv. _inmost_.

innera (compar. of inne) _'inner,' interior_, _WW_: _mental, spiritual_,
_BH, LL, Sc_.

inneð = innoð

inne-weard, -werd = inweard

innheardmann m. _one of the household troops_, MtL 8^9. [inhîred]

innhere m. _home force, native army_, #Chr# 1006#e#.

innian _to go in_, _Bo_: (±) _put up, lodge_, _Chr_ 1048: (+) _include_:
(+) _fill, restore, make good_, Æ. ['_inn_']

innierfe (e^2) n. _household stuff, furniture, goods_, #Bo# 31^19.

innifli (Cp 115#i#) = innelfe

inniht (WW 450^21) = incniht?

innîwian _to renew_, DR 168^12.

innon = innan

innor (_ÆGr_) compar. of inne. ['_inner_']

innoð mf. _inside, entrails, stomach, womb, breast, heart_, _BH, Bo, G_;
Æ, CP.

innoðmægen (e^3) n. _strength_, EHy 5^16.

innoðtýdernes f. _weakness of the bowels_, #Lcd# 105a.

innoðwund f. _internal wound_, #Lcd# 88b.

innra = innera

innung f. _dwelling_: _contents, takings, revenue_, _Bo, KC_.
['_inning_']

innweardlîce = inweardlîce

innweorud n. _retainers, household_, #Wid# 111.

innylfe = innelfe

inorf n. _household goods, furniture_.

inra (Æ) = innera

inræcan '_ingesserunt_,' WW 420^18 (v. A 31·532).

inr¯æsan _to rush upon_.

inrêcels n. _incense_, LkR 1^9.

insæglung = inseglung

ins¯æte adj. _dependent_, WW 185^9.

insætnes = insetnes

inscêawere m. _inspector_, DR 194.

inscêawung f. _inspection, view_, NG.

insceðende = unsceððende  [[redirected to "unscæððende"]]

in-segel, -segl (æ) n. _seal, signet_, _Æ, Ct_. ['_inseil_'; _L._]

±inseglian (æ) _to seal_, _LL_; ÆL. ['_inseil_']

inseglung f. _sealing, seal_, Æ (æ).

insendan _to send in, put in_, #VPs#.

insetnes f. _regulation_, DR.

insettan _to institute_, BH, JnL.

insigle n. _seal, signet_. [insegel]

insiht f. _narrative_, JnL.

insittende _sitting within_, #Rd# 47^7.

insmoh m. _slough_, MH 162^11.

insôcn f. _brawl in a house_, LL 597[80,12].

insomnian _to gather in_, BH 274^1.

inspinn n. _spindle_, WW.

instæpe I. m. _entrance_, ÆH 1·84. II. = instæpes

instæpes adv. _forthwith, directly_.

instæppan (Æ) = insteppan

instandan^6 (o^2) _to be present_, DR.

instandendlic (o^2) _required for present use_, MtR 6^11.

instede (y) _immediately_, NG.

in-stepe, -stepes = instæpes

insteppan^6 (æ) _to go in, enter_, Æ.

instice m. _internal stitching pain_, #Lcd#.

instîgan^1 _to climb in_, GD 24.

instihtian _to appoint, arrange_, LkL p2^6.

insting = onsting

instyde = instede

inswân m. _lord's swineherd_, LL 447.

inswôgan^7 _to invade_, BH 278^8.

inswôgennes f. _onrush_, BH 110^33.

intiga (#KGl#) = intinga

intimb- = ontimb-

intinga m. _matter, business_, Æ: _cause_: _fault_. butan intingan _in
vain, emptily_.

intô prep. with d. (instr.), a. _into, to, against, in_, Æ.

intrahtnung f. _interpretation_, MtL p2^7.

inðer adv. _apart_, MtR 17^1.

inðicce _crass, thick_, MtL 13^15.

inðînen f. _female servant_, GPH 401.

inðing (N) = intinga

inðwêan = onðwêan

in-wærc, -wræc m. _internal pain_.

inw¯æte f. _internal humour_, #Lcd# 97a.

inweard I. (innan-, inne-) adj. _internal, inward, inner, intrinsic,
deep, sincere, earnest_, _Æ, B, Bo, Cr_. as sbn. _inward parts_, _Æ,
WW_. II. adv. _within_: _mentally, spiritually_, _LkL_. ['_inward_']

inweardlic (e) _internal_, _Lcd_: _sincere_, W. adv. -lîce '_inwardly_,'
Æ: _deeply, thoroughly, heartily, sincerely_, _Æ, Met_.

inwendan _to change_, #VPs#.

inweorc n. _indoor work_, LL 454[11].

inwerd- = inweard-

inwid == inwit

inwidda m. _adversary, enemy_.

inwise f. _condiment_, #Lcd# 69a.

inwit I. n. _evil, deceit, guile_. II. adj. _wicked, malign, deceitful_.

inwitfeng m. _spiteful clutch_, B 1447.

inwitflân m. _treacherous shaft_, #Mod# 37.

inwitful _wicked, crafty_.

inwitgæst m. _evil guest_, B 2670.

inwitgecynd n. _evil nature_, #Sol# 329.

inwitgyren f. _treacherous snare_, #PPs# 139^5.

inwithlemm § (id) m. _treacherous wound_.

inwithrôf m. _unfriendly roof_, B 3123.

inwitnet n. _net of malice_, B 2167.

inwitnîð ¶ m. _cunning hostility_.

inwitrûn ¶ f. _evil, crafty counsel_.

inwitscear m. _murderous attack_, B 2478.

inwitsearo n. _artful intrigue_, B 1101.

inwitsorh ¶ f. _sorrow_.

inwitspell n. _tale of woe_, #Gen# 2024.

inwitstæf ¶ m. _wickedness, evil_.

inwitðanc ¶ m. _malicious thought, hostile intent_.

inwitwrâsn ¶ f. _hostile fetter_.

inwræc = inwærc

inwrîtere m. _writer, secretary_, ZDA 31·23.

inwritting f. _inscription_.

inwund f. _internal wound_, #Lcd# 70a.

inwunenes f. _persistence_, WW 426^5.

inwunung f. _residence in_, NC 304.

io- = geo-

îo (= îu) == gêo

ioc == geoc

iom = eom

ionna (N) adv. _within_.

ionnað = innoð

îor ¶ m. _name of a river-fish (eel?_): _name of the rune for =io=_.

iorning = ærning

iornð = iernð pres. 3 sg. of iernan.

iorsian (#KGl#) = iersian

Îotas mpl. _the Jutes_.

îow m. = îw

îowan = îewan

ippingîren = yppingîren

îren == îsen

irfe = ierfe

irgian = eargian

Iringes weg m. _milky way_, WW 53^23.

irm- = ierm-; iern-

irn- = iern-, eorn-

irre == ierre

irs- = iers-

irsenhelm = îsenhelm

irðling = yrðling

is pres. 3 sg. of eom, anv.

îs n. '_ice_,' _BH, Met, PPs_: (pl.) _pieces of ice_, _BH_: _name of the
rune for =i=_.

îsærn (#Gl#) = îsearn

îsceald ¶ _icy cold_, _Met, Seaf_. ['_icecold_']

ise (N) = gise  [[headword spelled "gîse"]]

îsearn (æ, e) m. _halcyon, kingfisher_.

îsen I. (îsern, îren) n. '_iron_,' _Æ, BH, CP, Gl, LL_: _iron
instrument_, _Lcd_: _fetter_, _Ps_: (¶) _iron weapon, sword_, _B_:
_ordeal of red-hot iron_, LL 230[6]. [_Ger._ eisen] II. adj. _of iron,
'iron,'_ _Æ, B, Bl, CP, Da_.

îsenbend ¶ (îr-) mf. _iron bond, fetter_.

îsenbyrne (îsern-) f. _iron corslet_, B 671.

isend = iesend

îsenesmið = îsensmið

îsenfetor (îsern-) f. _iron fetter_, #Gl#.

îsengelôma (îr-) m. _iron instrument_, #Nar# 9^19.

îsengræf m. _iron-mine_? KC 5·234^28.

îsengr¯æg (grêi) '_iron-grey_,' _WW_.

îsenheard (îr-) _hard as iron_, B 112. ['_iron-hard_']

îsenhearde f. _('iron-hard'), black centaury, vervain, knapweed_, _Lcd_.

îsenhelm (irsen-) m. _iron helmet_, WW 142^2.

îsenhere (-ern) m. _iron-clad army_, #Ex# 348.

îsenhyrst adj. _with iron fittings_, KC.

îsenordâl (ý) n. _ordeal by iron_, LL.

îsenôre f. _iron mine_, #Gl#.

îsen-panna m., -panne f. _frying pan_, #Gl#.

îsenscofl f. _iron shovel_, #Gl# (îsernscobl).

îsenscûr f. _shower of arrows_, B 3116 (-ern).

îsensmið m. _blacksmith_.

îsenswât m. _dross of iron_? #Lcd#.

îsentang f. _snuffers_, WW 327^14.

îsenðrêat m. _iron clad troop_, B 330 (îr-).

îsenwyrhta m. _blacksmith_, WW 310^33.

isern = iesende  [[under "iesend"]]

îsern (1) == îsen; (2) = îsearn

îsgebind n. _fetters of ice_, B 1113.

îsgebl¯æd (ý) n. _ice-blister, chilblain_? #Lcd#.

îsig '_icy_,' _Met_: _shining_? _glistening_? _covered with ice_? B 33.

îsigfeðera _with frosted wings_, #Seaf# 24.

îsiht _icy_, ÆL 23b^572.

îsîðes adv. _immediately_, LL (338^11).

îsmere m. _icy lake_, #Met# 28^62.

±îsnian _to cover with iron_. pp. îsnod _iron-clad_, WW 236^19.

itest, itst pres. 2 sg., iteð, itt pres. 3 sg. of etan.

îð == îeð

îðan (¯æ, ê, ý) _to lay waste, ravage, devastate, desolate, destroy_, Æ.

iu- = geo-

iû = gêo

iuc == geoc

Iûdêas sbmp. _the Jews_, G.

Iûdêisc _Jewish_, G.

iugian = geocian

îuih (NG) = êowic, êow

îuwian (AS 7^19) = îewan

îw (êow) m. _'yew,' yew-tree_, Æ; Mdf.

îwberge (êow) f. _yew-berry_, #Lcd#.




=K=


Words beginning with =k= will be found under =c=.




=L=


lâ interj. _lo! behold! oh! ah!_ Æ. lâ lêof _O Lord! O sir!_: _indeed,
verily_, Æ. hwæt lâ _what!_ wâ lâ wâ! _alas!_

label = (*lafel), læfel

laber (_Lcd_) = l¯æfer

lâc nf. _play, sport_: (¶) _strife, battle_: _sacrifice, offering_, Æ,
CP: _gift, present_, _Mt_; Æ: _booty_, _B_: (¶) _message_. ['_lake_']

+lac ¶ n. _tumult, commotion_. sweorda +l. _battle_: _crowd, host_, #Cr#
896.

lâcan^7 pret. 3 sg. leolc _to move up and down, leap, jump, swing, fly_,
_Jul_: _play (instrument)_: (¶) _fight, contend_, _B_: (+) _incite to_,
AO: _be rewarded_. ['_lake_']

lâcd¯æd f. _munificence_, OEG 3833.

lâcgeofa m. _generous giver_, #PPs# 67^18.

+lâcian _to present, bestow_.

lâclic _sacrificial_, LL (380^18).

±lâcnian (¯æ, ê) _to heal, cure, treat, look after_, _Æ, BH, LkL_; AO,
CP: _foment, dress (a wound)_. ['_lechne_']

lâcnigendlic _surgical_, #HGl# 478.

lâcnimende only in bêon l. '_munerari_,' BHy 3^19.

lâcnung f. _healing, cure_: _medicament, remedy_.

lâcsang m. _offertory hymn_, WW 130^2.

lactuc, lactu-ce, m. -ca f. _lettuce_, Æ. [_L._]

lacu f. _running water, stream, pool, 'lake,'_ _Chr_ 656#e#.

lâd I. f. _course, journey_, _An, B_: (±) _way, street, water-way_:
_leading, carrying_, _LL_: _maintenance, support_. ['_load_,' '_lode_']
II. f. _clearing from blame or accusation, purgation, exculpation_, CP.

ladan (NG) = hladan

±lâdian _to clear oneself from blame or accusation, exculpate oneself_:
_let off, excuse_, Æ, AO, CP.

lâdiendlic _excusable_, WW 233^31.

lâdmann m. _conductor, guide_, _Æ_. ['_lodeman_']

lâd-rinc? -rincman m. _conductor, escort_, LL 3[7] (v. 2·441).

ladsar = laser  [[headword spelled "lâser"]]

lâdscipe m. _leadership_, WW 481^6.

lâdtêow, lâdðêow == lâttêow

lâdung f. _exculpation, excuse, defence, apology_, Æ, CP.

l¯æc = (1) lêac; (2) lâc

l¯æca = l¯æce

-l¯æca v. âg-, ellen-l. etc.

+l¯æca _emulous_, GPH 391.

l¯æcan _to spring up, rise, flare up_, #Sat# 716.

+l¯æcan _to emulate_, GPH 391: _join with, make common cause with_? #CPs#
140^4. [lâc]

±læccan _to seize, grasp, comprehend_, _Æ_: _capture, catch_, _Chr, G,
LL_: _receive_, ÆL. ['_latch_,' '_i-lecche_']

l¯æce (ê, ý) m. _physician, doctor_, _BH, LkL_; Æ, CP: '_leech_,'
_WW_; Æ.

l¯æcebôc f. _book of prescriptions_, #Lcd#.

l¯æcecræft m. _'leech-craft,' art of healing_, _Bo, Lcd_; Æ: _medicament,
remedy, prescription_, Æ.

l¯æcecræftig _skilled in medicine_, #Lcd# 186b.

l¯æcecynn n. _race of physicians_, #Rd# 6^10.

l¯æcecyst f. _medicine chest_, GD 344^17.

l¯æcedôm m. _medicament, medicine_, _BH, WW_ (e); Æ, CP: _salvation_.
['_leechdom_']

l¯æcedômlic _salutary_, A 5·458.

l¯æcedômnes f. _cataplasm_, WW.

l¯æcefeoh n. _doctor's fee_, LL (148^19).

l¯æcefinger m. _('leech-finger'), fourth finger_, _Lcd_.

l¯æcegeatwa? (-getea) fp. _medical apparatus_, v. NC 304.

l¯æcehûs n. _sick room, hospital_.

l¯æceiren n. _surgeon's knife, lancet_, GD 32.

l¯æcesealf f. _medicinal ointment_, WW 514^21.

l¯æceseax n. _lancet_, CP 187^9.

l¯æcewyrt f. _medicinal herb, drug_, Æ: _ribwort_.

l¯æcnian = lâcnian

l¯ædan (±) _to 'lead,' guide, conduct, carry, lift, take, bring_, _Æ, BH,
Bl, Chr, VPs_; CP. wîf l. _take a wife, marry_: (±) _produce, bring
forth_: _pass, lead (life)_, _BH, Met_: _to mark or beat the bounds of
land_, EC 155: _perform, do_, _An_: _place, lay_, Æ: _sprout forth,
grow, spread_.

l¯æde (BH 400^2) = l¯æwede

l¯æden I. (ê, êo) n. '_Latin_,' _A, BH, CP_: _any foreign language_,
_Lcd_ ('_leden_'). II. adj. _Latin_.

l¯ædenboc (e) f. _Latin book_, Æ.

l¯ædend I. m. _bringer_. II. m. _excuser, apologist_. [*l¯ædan]

l¯ædengereord n. _Latin language_, #Lcd#.

l¯ædengeðêode n. _Latin language_, CP.

l¯æden-isc, -lic _Latin_.

l¯ædenlâr f. _knowledge of Latin_, W 124^12.

+l¯ædenlic '_ductilis_,' #EPs# 97^6.

l¯ædennama m. _Latin noun_, #ÆGr# 292^18.

l¯ædenspr¯æc (ê) f. _Latin language_, Æ, CP.

l¯ædenstæfum (ê) adv. _in Latin_, Jn 19^20.

l¯ædenware mpl. _Latin people, Romans_, CP.

l¯ædenword (ê) n. _Latin word_, #ÆGr# 122^6.

l¯ædnes f. _bringing forth_, BH.

l¯ædtêow = lâttêow

l¯æf = (1) lâf; (2) lêaf

±l¯æfan (ê) I. _to 'leave,' bequeath_, _B, Jn_; Æ, CP: _spare, leave
behind, have left_, _Lk, Mk_: _remain_, _Æ_. [lâf] II. = lîefan

læfel (e) m. _spoon, basin, vessel, bowl, cup_. [_Ger._ löffel; _L._
labellum]

l¯æfend (WW 168^17) = l¯æwend

l¯æfer f. _rush, reed, iris, gladiolus_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ: _metal plate_, Æ.
['_laver_'; '_levers_']

l¯æferbed n. _reed-bed_, WW 138^29.

l¯æfnes = lêafnes

læg pret. 3 sg. of licgan.

l¯æg = (1) lêag; (2) lîeg

lægde = legde pret. sg. of lecgan.

l¯ægon pret. pl. of licgan.

l¯ægt = lîget

læht pp., læhte pret. sg. of læccan.

l¯æl (ê) f., l¯æla m. _rod, whip, switch_: _bruise, weal, stripe_, #Ex#.

l¯ælan, l¯ælian _to become black and blue, be bruised_.

l¯æmen (ê) _of clay, earthen_, Æ. [lâm]

l¯æmian = lêmian  [[headword spelled "lemian"]]

l¯æn (â) I. nf. _loan, borrowing, lease, grant, gift, present, benefit_,
Æ, CP. [lêon] II. = l¯ænland

±l¯ænan (ê) _to 'lend,'_ _WW_; CP: _give, grant, lease_, _Gen_, Æ.

l¯ændagas ¶ mpl. _loan-days, transitory days, days of a man's life_.

lænde-, lænden- = lenden-

l¯æne (ê) _lent, temporary, inconstant, transitory_: _perishable, frail,
poor_: _weak, sinful_, CP. [l¯æn]

l¯ænelic _passing, transitory_.

l¯ænend m. _lender_, _WW_. ['_lenend_']

l¯ænendlic = l¯ænelic

l¯ænere m. '_lender_,' _WW_ 189^21.

læng = leng

længten- = lencten-

l¯ænian = lêanian

l¯ænland n. _leased land_, v. LL 2·323.

l¯ænlic = l¯ænelic

-l¯ænung v. feoh-l.

læpeldre f. _dish_, Æ.

læpewince (e) f. _lapwing_, #Gl#.

læppa (a) m. _lappet, piece, section, lobe, portion, district_, _CP,
Lcd_; Æ. ['_lap_']

-læppede v. fîf-l.

±l¯æran (ê) _to teach, instruct_, _A, BH_: _enjoin, advise, persuade,
urge, preach_. l. forð _hand down (to others)_: (+) _convert_: (+)
¶_recall_, ES 37·197. ±l¯æred _learned (opposed to_ l¯æwed), hence
_clerical_ (_as opposed to lay)_, _spiritual (as opposed to temporal)_,
Æ, CP. ['_lere_']

+l¯ære _empty, hungry_, NC 295. [_Ger._ leer]

+l¯ærednes f. _learning, skill_, BH.

l¯ærest = l¯æst

l¯ærestre f. _instructress_, Æ.

l¯ærgedêfe _adapted for instruction_? FT 61.

l¯ærig m. _edge, border (of a shield)_? v. A 37·55.

-l¯ærigian v. ymb-l.  [[headword spelled "ymbl¯ærgian"]]

l¯æringm¯æden n. _female pupil_.

l¯æringmann m. _disciple_, RB 20^6.

l¯ærnes f. _emptiness_, _Lcd_ 22b. ['_leerness_']

læs pret. 3 sg. of lesan.

l¯æs I. (ê) adv. and sbn. _less, lest_, Æ, AO, CP. ðý l¯æs (ðe) conj. w.
subj. _lest_. II. f. gs. l¯æswe _pasture_, _JnL_ (ê), _WW_; Æ; Mdf.
['_lease_,' '_leasow_'] III. f. (_blood-_)_letting_, #Lcd#.

l¯æsboren _of lower birth_, LL (246^21).

l¯æsest (MtR) = l¯æst I.

l¯æsian = l¯æswian

l¯æson pret. pl. of lesan.

l¯æssa adj. (comp. of lýtel) _'less,' smaller, fewer_, _Æ, Bo, Chr_:
_inferior_, _MtL, MtR_ (ê). sb. _A, Æ_. adv. _BH_.

læst f. _fault, sin_, NC 305. [_ON._]

l¯æst I. superl. of lýtel '_least_,' _Gu, Lcd_; CP, AO. ðe l¯æste _lest_,
CM. II. f. _performance, fulfilment_, #Ex# 308. III. = lâst

±l¯æstan (ê) _to follow, help, serve_, _B, Bl, Met, OET_; AO _perform,
do, carry out, accomplish_, AO: _endure, last, continue_, _Cr_; Æ:
_furnish, pay_, W ['_last_'; _Ger._ leisten]

l¯æste f. _'last' (for the foot)_, _WW_.

l¯æstend m. _doer, performer_, BH.

+l¯æstfullian _to testify_, #LPs# 80^9.

l¯æstwyrhta (eo^2) m. _shoemaker_, WW.

l¯æswe v. l¯æs II.

±l¯æswian _to depasture, graze, feed_, _Æ, LkL_. ['_leasow_']

læt I. (lat- in obl. cases) comp. lætra; sup. lætest, lætemest _slow_,
_B, Bl, CP, Lcd_; Æ: _slack, lax, negligent_: '_late_,' _Lk_. II. m.
_man of the class between the slave and the ceorl_, _LL_ (v. 2·564).
['_laet_']

l¯æt pres. 3 sg. of l¯ædan.

+l¯æt = +l¯æte II.

l¯ætan^7 pret. 3 sg. lêt, leort (tr.) _to allow to remain, leave behind,
depart from_, _'let' alone_, _Bl, CP_: _leave undone_, _BH_: (±)
_bequeath_, _EC_: _allow_, _Bl, LL_: _cause to do_, _BH_: _regard as,
consider_, _BH, Chr_, CP: _behave towards, treat_: (intr.) _allow to
escape, emit, let out, set free_, _Æ, Lcd_: _'let' (on lease)_, _BC_:
_assert, pretend_, _Lk_: (+) _allot, assign_. l. from _refrain from_
(late); +l. nêah land _approach the shore_? (ES 37·191); on bæc l.
_leave behind_.

l¯ætanîa = lêtanîa

lætbyrd f. _slow birth_, #Lcd# 185a.

+l¯æte I. n. _manners, bearing_, NC 295. [_ON._ l¯æti] II. n. _junction
of roads_, Æ.

lætemest I. adv. _lastly, finally_, _NG_. II. v. læt. ['_latemost_']

læthýdig _slow-minded, dull_, #Cra# 10.

lætlîce adv. _slowly_, _Gu_. ['_lately_']

lætmest = lætemest

lætnes f. _slowness, delay_, ÆL 23b^647: _sloth_, GD 174^23.

lætra (_Æ, LL_) v. l¯æt. ['_latter_']

lætr¯æde _slow, deliberate_, CP 149^14.

lætsum _backward_, _Chr_. ['_latesom_']

l¯ætt f. (pl. latta) _beam, 'lath,'_ _WW_.

l¯ættêow = lâttêow

l¯ættewestre f. _guide, conductress_, Æ. [lâttêow]

lætting = letting

-lætto v. un-l.

l¯æð n. _a division of a county containing several hundreds, 'lathe,'_
_BC_ 3·162: _landed property_? _(meadow) land_? LL 400[3,2].

l¯æðan _to abuse, revile, hate_: _cause to shun_, RB 11^18. [lâð]

l¯æðð, l¯æððo (CP) f. _wrong, injury_: _hatred, malice_, _Bl_. ['_leth_';
lâð]

l¯æuw = lêow

l¯æwa (ê) m. _betrayer, traitor_, _Lk_; Æ. [v. '_lewe_']

±l¯æwan _to betray_. [_Goth._ lêwjan]

-l¯æwe v. druncen-, hunger-l.

l¯æwede _lay, laic, unlearned_. as sb. _layman_, _BH_; Æ, CP. ['_lewd_']

læwel = læfel

l¯æwend m. _betrayer, traitor_, #Gl#.

l¯æwerce = lâwerce

læwil = læfel

læx = leax

lâf f. _what is left, remnant, legacy, relic, remains, rest_, _Bl, Chr_;
Æ: _relict, widow_, Æ, AO. tô lâfe _alone_. tô lâfe bêon _to remain
over_. w¯æpna, daroða l. _survivors of battle_. hamora lâfa _results of
forging, swords_. ['_lave_'; lîfan]

lâferce = lâwerce

±lafian _to pour water on, wash_, _'lave,' bathe_, _B, Lcd_: _ladle
out_, _Lcd_.

lag- = lah-

-laga v. lund-l.

lage- = lagu-

lagen pp. of lêan II.

±lagian _to appoint, ordain_, _W_. ['_law_,' '_i-lahen_']

lago- = lagu-

-lagol v. ¯æ-l.

lâgon = l¯ægon pret. pl. of licgan.

lagu I. f. (old neut. pl. lagu; #Chr# 1052#d#) _'law,' ordinance, rule,
regulation_, Æ; _Chr, LL, RB_: _right, legal privilege_, LL: _district
governed by the same laws_. II. m. _water, flood, sea, ocean_, _Gen,
Met_: _name of the rune for =l=_. ['_lay_']

+lagu np. _extent, surface (of sea)_, #Seaf# 64? [_OS._ gilagu]

lagucræftig _skilled in seafaring_, B 209.

lagufæsten ¶ n. _sea, ocean_.

lagufæðm m. _enveloping waves_, #Rd# 61^7.

laguflôd m. _wave, stream, waters, sea, ocean_.

lagulâd ¶ f. _water-way, sea_.

lagumearg m. _sea-horse, ship_, #Gu# 1306.

lagusîð ¶ m. _sea-journey_.

lagustr¯æt f. _sea-path_, B 239.

lagustrêam ¶ m. _water, sea, ocean_.

laguswimmend ¶ m. _swimming in the sea (fish)_.

lâh pret. 3 sg. of lêon.

lah- = lag-

lahbreca m. _law-breaker, impious man_, #Sc# 9^10.

lahbrecende _impious, profane_, #Sc# 9^9.

lahbryce m. _breach of the law_, LL.

lah-cêap, -côp m. _money paid (by an outlaw) for restitution of legal
rights_, LL.

lahlic _lawful, legal_, #Sc# 46^2. adv. -lîce.

lahmann m. _an official declarer of the law_, _LL_ 376. [v. '_lawman_']

lahriht n. _legal right_, LL.

lah-slitt fn., -slite m. _fine for breach of the (Danish) law_, LL.

lahwita m. _lawyer_, LL (308^13).

lâm n. _'loam,' clay, earth_, _Æ, WW_; Mdf.

lama (o) wk. adj. and sb. m. _crippled, lame, paralytic, weak (man)_,
_Æ, BH, Cp, El, Mt, WW_.

lamb (Æ), pl. lamb(e)ru, lambor (A) n. '_lamb_,' _Æ, G, Gl, Gu, WW_.

lambyrd f. _imperfect birth_, #Lcd# 185a.

lâmfæt n. ¶ _vessel of clay (the body)_.

lamp I. pret. 3 sg. of limpan. II. (#KGl#) = lamb

lamprêde f. _lamprey_. [_L._]

lâm-pytt, -sêaða m. '_loampit_,' Ct.

lâmwyrhta m. _potter_, G.

lân = l¯æn

lanan obl. cases of lanu.

land (o) n. _earth_, _'land,' soil_, _B, BH, VPs, WW_; Mdf: _territory,
realm, province, district_, _Cp, Chr, Bl, VPs_: _landed property_, _Æ,
Bl_: _country (not town)_, _Æ, BH_: _ridge in a ploughed field_.

+landa m. _compatriot, kinsman_, WW 211^20.

landâdl = hlandâdl?  [[Cross-reference unidentified.]]

landælf f. _land-elf_, WW 516^27.

landâgend m. _native_, BH.

landâgende _owning land_, LL.

landâr f. _landed property_, Æ.

landbegenga (i^2) m. _husbandman, peasant, native_, CP.

landbegengnes f. _habitation_, #BPs# 119^5 (o^1).

landbigong m. _dwelling in a country_, #BPs# 118^54 (o^1)

landbôc f. _'land book,' written grant of land_, _Ct, WW_.

landbr¯æce m. _first ploughing (after land has lain fallow)_, WW 105^11.

landbûend I. mf. _inhabitant, native_: _husbandman_. II. f. _colony_.

landbûende _dwelling on the land, native_.

landbûnes f. _colony, settlement_, #Nar#.

land-cêap, -côp m. _fine paid to the lord on the alienation of land_,
_BC_. ['_landcheap_']

landefen m. _measure or proportion of land_, #Chr# 1085.

landesmann = landmann

landfæsten n. _natural fortress_, AO 80^14 (o^1).

landfeoh n. _recognitory rent for land_, KC.

landfolc n. _people of the country, inhabitants_, _Æ_. ['_landfolk_']

landfruma m. _ruler, prince_, B 31.

landfyrd f. _army_.

landgafol n. _land-tax, tribute_, _LL_. ['_land-gavel_']

landgehwerf n. _exchange of land_, Ct.

landgemaca m. _neighbour_, OEG.

land-gem¯ære, -gemirce n. _boundary, limit, frontier_, AO.

landgesceaft f. _earthly creature_, #Da# 360.

landgeweorc n. _fortified place_, B 938.

landgewyrpe n. _heap of earth_? Ct.

landhæbbende _owning or ruling land_.

landhæfen f. _real property_, LL 22[32].

landhere m. _native force_: _land force (opposed to naval force)_.

landhlâford m. _lord of a country, lord of a manor, landlord_.

landhredding f. _redemption of land_.

landlagu f. _local law_, LL.

landlêas _not owning land_, _LL_. ['_landless_']

land-lêod m., nap. -lêode, -lêoda, -lêodan _inhabitant of a country,
native_, AO.

landlyre m. _loss of territory_, #Chr# 1105.

landmann m. _inhabitant of a country, native_, _Ex, LL_. ['_landmann_']

landmearc m. _boundary_.

+landod _having landed property_, LL 182[11].

landopenung f. _first ploughing of land_, WW 147^9.

landr¯æden v. ealdlandr¯æden.

landrest f. _grave_. #An# 782.

landrîca m. _landed proprietor_.

landrîce n. _territory_, AO.

landriht n. _'land-right,' right to own or occupy land or connected with
its occupation_, _B, Ex, Gen_: _that which is due from land or estates_.

landscearu (a^2) f. _tract of land, province, country_, CP: _boundary,
landmark_. [v. CC 48]

landscipe m. _region_, #Gen# 376.

landscoru = landscearu

landsêta m. _settler_, WW 111^15. [s¯æta]

landseten f. _occupation of land_: _occupied land, estate_.

landseðla m. _occupier of land_, TC 593^6.

landsidu m. _custom of a country_, CP.

landsittende _occupying land_, #Chr#.

landsôcn ¶ f. _search for land to settle on_.

landspêd f. _landed property_, KC 3·349^24.

landspêdig _rich in land_, Æ.

landsplott m. _plot of land_, KC 4·39^12.

landstede m. _region_, #Wif# 16 (o).

landstycce n. _small plot of ground_, GD, LL.

landwaru f. _inhabitants, population_, B 2321.

landweard m. _coast-warden_, B 1890.

landwela m. _earthly possessions_, #Ph# 505.

lane = lanu

lang (o) comp. lengra, superl. lengest _'long,' tall_, _AO, BH, Lcd,
MH_; CP.

+lang (usu. w. æt or on) _dependent on, attainable from, present in,
belonging to_, _Æ, AO, Gu_. [v. '_along_']

langafrîgedæg m. _Good Friday_.

langað = langoð

langbolster mn. _feather-bed_, WW 276^36.

lange (o) adv. comp. leng, lenge, superl. lengest _'long,' a long time,
far_, _B, BH, Bl, Bo_.

langf¯ære _lasting, protracted_, Æ.

langfêrnes f. _length, long duration_, #Sc# 29^1.

langfirst m. _long space of time_, #Gu# 920.

langgestrêon n. _ancient store of wealth_, B 2240.

langian (o) (impers. with acc. of pers.) _to 'long' for, yearn after,
grieve for, be pained_, _AO_ (o): _grow longer_, _Lcd_: _summon_:
_belong_.

+langian _to send for, summon, call_, Æ: _apprehend, seize_, LL
202[6,2].

langieldo f. _advanced age_.

langlîce adv. _for a long time, long, at length_, Æ.

langlîfe _long-lived_.

langmôd _constant, patient, long-suffering_. adv. -lîce.

langmôdig _long-suffering_ (v. late), NC 347.

langmôdnes f. _long-suffering_, #Sc# 10^17.

langnes f. _length_, _Æ_. ['_longness_']

langoð m. _longing, unsatisfied craving, discontent_.

langsceaft _having a long shaft_.

langscip n. _man of war_, #Chr# 897#a#.

langstrang '_longanimis_,' #LPs# 102^8.

langsum _long, lasting, tedious, protracted_, _B_ (o), _Lcd_; Æ.
['_longsome_'] adv. -lîce, AO 58^17 (o).

langsumnes f. _length_, _Ps_; Æ. ['_longsomeness_']

langsweored (y^2) _long-necked_.

langtwidig _lasting, assured_, B 1708.

langung (o) f. _'longing,' desire_, _Bl_: _weariness, sadness,
dejection_, Æ: _delay_, CP (o). [langian]

langunghwîl f. _time of weariness_, #An# 125.

langweb n. _warp (in weaving)_, WW 187^12.

langwege '_peregre_,' MkL 13^34 (o^1, [oe]^2).

langwyrpe _oblong_, NC 305^347.

lânland = l¯ænland

lann (o) ¶ f. _chain, fetter_.

lanu (o) f. _'lane,' street_, _Bl_.

lapian _to 'lap' up, drink_, _Lcd_; Æ.

lappa (#Gl#) = læppa

lâr f. _'lore,' learning, science, art of teaching, preaching,
doctrine_, _Bl_; Æ, CP: _precept, exhortation, advice, instigation_,
_JnL_; AO: _history, story_: _cunning_, #Gen# 2693.

lârbôc f. _book containing instruction (used of St Paul's Epistles, and
Bede's works)_, Æ.

lârbodung f. _teaching, preaching_, NC 305.

lârbysn f. _example_, WW 163^43.

lârcniht m. _disciple_, LkL p 2^2.

lârcræft m. _knowledge_, #Sol# 3.

lârcwide ¶ m. _teaching, precept_.

lardôm m. _teaching, instruction_, LL 258[51].

lâr-êow, -ow, -uw (a) m. _teacher, master, preacher_, _BH, JnL_; Æ, AO,
CP. ['_lorthew_']

lârêowdôm m. _function of teacher, instruction_, CP: _ecclesiastical
authority_, Æ, CP.

lârêowlic _like a teacher_, OEG.

lârêowsetl n. _teacher's seat, pulpit_.

lârêwes = lârêowes gs. of lârêow.

lârfæsten n. _prescribed fast_, A 11·99.

lârhlystend m. _catechumen_, OEG 2881.

lârhûs n. _school_, #HGl# 405.

lârlêast (ê, ý) f. _want of instruction, ignorance_.

lârlic _conducive to learning, instructive_, Æ. betwux larlîcum gefylcum
_amongst soldiers in training_, Æ.

lârsmið ¶ m. (nap. -smeoðas) _teacher, counsellor_.

lârspell n. _homily, sermon, treatise_, _Æ_. ['_lorespell_']

lârsum _teachable_, NC 305.

lârswice m. _trickery_, W 309^14.

lârðêaw (MF), lâruwa (N) = (*lârðêow), lârêow

lârðegn m. _teacher_, NC 305.

lârwita m. _learned man_, LL (308^13).

lâser (o^2) m? _weed, tare_, #Gl#.

lâst (¯æ, ê, êa) m. _sole of foot_: _spoor, footprint, track, trace_, _B,
Bl_; Æ, CP. on lâst(e) _behind, after, in pursuit of_. on l. lecgan _to
follow_. lâstas lecgan _to go_: _gait, step_. ['_last_']

±lâst (¯æ, ê) n. _accomplishment, observance_, RB 5^5: _duty, due,
obligation, vow_.

+lâstful _helpful, serviceable_, _LL_; AO. ['_lastfull_']

lâstweard m. _successor, heir_: _pursuer_.

lâstword n. _fame after death_, #Seaf# 73.

lasur = laser  [[headword spelled "lâser"]]

lat- v. læt-.

late adv. comp. lator, sup. latest '_late_,' _Chr, Jul_: _slowly_,
_Lcd_: _at last_, AO. [læt]

latemest = lætemest II.

lâtêow = lâttêow

±latian _to be slow, indolent_: _linger, delay, hesitate_, Æ.

lator, adv. comp., latost (æ), superl. _slower, later_, _A, Bo, MtR_;
AO, CP. ['_latter_,' '_last_']

latt = lætt  [[headword spelled "l¯ætt"]]

lattêh f. _guiding rein_, WW 120^9. [lâd]

lâttêow, lâttêowa (¯æ) m. _leader, guide, general_, _Bo, VPs_ (lad-); AO,
CP. ['_lattew_']

lâttêowdôm m. _leadership, guidance, instruction_, CP.

latung f. _delay, hindrance_, OEG 7^129.

lâtðêow, lâtuw = lâttêow

lâð I. (±) _hated, hateful, hostile, malignant, evil_, _AO, B_:
_loathsome, noxious, grievous, unpleasant_, _Ep_; CP. ['_loath_'] II. n.
_pain, harm, injury, misfortune_, AO: _insult, annoyance, harmful
thing_, _BH, Lcd_; CP. ['_loath_'; _Ger._ leid]

lâðbite m. _wound_, B 1122.

lâðe adv. _inimically, in detestation_.

lâðêow = lâttêow

lâðettan _to hate, loathe_: _make hurtful or repulsive_, Æ.

lâðgenîðla ¶ m. _persecutor, foe_.

lâðgetêona ¶ m. _enemy_.

lâðgewinna m. _enemy_, #Rd# 16^29.

laðian _to invite, summon, call upon, ask_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._ laden]

lâðian _to hate, be hated_, _AO_; Æ. ['_loathe_']

lâðlêas _inoffensive, innocent_.

lâðlic _'loathly,' hateful, horrible, repulsive, unpleasant_, _BH_; Æ.
adv. -lîce.

lâðscipe m. _misfortune_, #Gen# 2048.

lâðsearu n? _hateful, contrivance_, #Da# 436.

lâðsîð m. _painful journey, death_, #Ex# 44.

lâðspel n. _sad tidings_, AO.

lâððêow = lâttêow

±laðung f. _calling, invitation_, CP: _assembly, congregation, church_,
Æ. ['_lathing_']

lâðwende ¶ _hateful, hostile, bad_.

lâðwendemôd _hostile minded_, #Gen# 448.

lâðweorc n. _evil deed_, #PPs# 105^26.

laur m. _laurel, bay, laver_, #Lcd#.

laurbêam (lawer-) m. _laurel_.

laurberige f. _laurel-berry_, #Lcd#.

laurice (_Cp_) = lâwerce

laurtrêow n. _laurel-tree_, #Lcd#.

lauwer, lawer = laur

lâwerce (¯æ) f. '_lark_,' _WW_; Mdf.

lêa I. (#VPs#) = lêo. II. gdas. of lêah.

lêac I. (¯æ, ê, êo) n. _'leek,' onion, garlic garden-herb_, _Lcd_; Æ. II.
pret. 3 sg. of lûcan.

lêac- = lêah-

lêacblæd n. _leek leaf_, NC 305.

lêaccærse (e^2) f., _cress, nasturtium_, #Lcd#.

leac-trog, -troc, -tric = leahtroc

lêactûn (lêah-, lêh-) m. _kitchen-garden, garden of herbs_, _LkL, WW_.
['_leighton_']

lêactûnweard (ê^1) m. _gardener_, _WW_ 127^14. ['_leightonward_']

lêacweard (e^1, o^2) m. _gardener_.

lêad (ê) n. '_lead_,' _BH_; Æ, CP: _leaden vessel, cauldron_, _A_ 9·264.

lêaden (ê) '_leaden_,' _Æ, LL_.

lêadgedelf n. _lead-mine_, KC 3·401^7.

lêadgeota (o) m. _plumber_, LL 455[16].

lêadgewiht n. _lead-weight, a scale of weight_, v. CC 77.

lêadstæf m. _loaded stick for beating with_, WW 441^20.

lêaf (î) I. (±) f. _'leave,' permission, privilege_, _BH, Chr_; Æ, CP.
II. n. _'leaf,' shoot_, pl. _foliage_, _MtL_ (êo), _VPs_; Æ: _sheet of
paper_, _BH_.

±lêafa m. _belief, faith_, _Æ, Mt_; AO. ['_leve_'; _Ger._ glaube]

±lêafe (¯æ) f. _leave, permission, licence_, Æ.

±lêafful _believing_, _JnR_: _faithful, trustworthy_, _MtL_.
['_leafful_'] adv. -lîce.

+lêaffulnes f. _faith, trust, faithfulness_, Æ.

lêafhelmig _leafy at the top_, GPH 390.

±lêafhlystend (e) m. _believing listener, catechumen_, OEG.

+lêaflêas _unbelieving_, Æ.

+lêaflêasnes f. _unbelief_, W 294^2.

+lêaf-lêast, -lýst f. _unbelief_, Æ.

lêafleoht _light, easy_, RB 5^19.

+lêaflic _credible, faithful_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

lêafnes (ê, ý) f. _leave, permission_, BH.

+lêafnesword n. _password_, B 245.

lêafscead n. _leafy shade_, #Ph# 205.

+lêafsum _believing, faithful_: _credible_.

lêafwyrm (i^2) m. _caterpillar_, #ASPs# 77^51.

lêag I. (ê) f. _'lye,' alkalized water_, _Ep, Lcd_. II. = lêah I. III.
pret. 3 sg. of lêogan.

lêagung f. _lying_, #Nar# 2^21. [lêogan]

lêah I. lêage (#Chr#) m. _piece of ground_, _'lea,' meadow_, _BC_; Mdf.
II. = lêag I. and III.

leahte pret. 3 sg. of leccan.

leahter == leahtor

leahtor (e^1) m. _vice, sin, offence, crime, fault_, Æ, CP: _reproach_:
_disease, injury_, #Lcd#.

leahtorbêre _laughable, causing laughter_, RB 18^8. [hleahtor]

leahtorcwide m. _opprobrious speech_, #Jul# 199.

leahtorful (e^1, e^2) _vicious, seductive_.

leahtorlêas _faultless, blameless_.

leahtorlîce _foully, wickedly_, Æ.

-leahtorwyrðe v. un-l.

leahtras nap. of leahtor.

leahtrian (e) _to accuse, revile, reprove, blame_, _Æ_; AO, CP:
_corrupt_. ['_lehtrie_']

leah-troc, -tric, -trog m. _lettuce_. [_L._ lactuca]

lêahtrung (ê) f. _blaming, detraction_, WW 150^1.

lêahtûn = lêactûn

lêan I. n. _reward, gift, loan, compensation, remuneration,
retribution_, _B, Mt_; Æ. ['_lean_'; _Ger._ lohn] II. sv^6 (pret. 3 sg.
lôg, lôh) and wv. _to blame, censure, reproach_, AO, CP.

lêangyfa m. _rewarder_, #Lcd# 3·436^23.

±lêanian (¯æ) _to reward, recompense, repay, requite_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._
lohnen]

lêap m. _basket_, _W_: _basket for catching or keeping fish_, _WW_:
_measure_: _trunk (body)_, #Jud# 111. ['_leap_']

lêas I. adj. (w. g.) _without, free from, devoid of, bereft of_: (±)
_false, faithless_: _untruthful, deceitful_, _WW_; Æ: _vain, worthless_.
II. n. _falsehood, lying_, _Bo_; CP. ['_lease_']

lêasbrêd (-bregd) I. _lying, false, deceitful_, Æ. II. m. _cheating,
trickery_.

lêasbrêda m. _trickster_, ES 43·306.

lêasbrêdende _wily, deceitful_, #ÆGr# 286^6.

lêasbrêdnes f. _deception, falsehood_.

lêasbregd == lêasbrêd

lêascræft m. _false art_, Æ.

lêasere m. _liar, hypocrite_, _MtL_: _buffoon, mime, jester, fool_.
['_leaser_']

lêasest (_MtL_) = l¯æst I.

lêasettan _to pretend_, Æ, RB.

lêas-ferhð, -fyrhð, _false_, NC 305.

lêasferðnes f. _levity, folly_, CP.

lêasfyrhte = lêasferhð

lêasgewitnes f. _false witness_, Æ.

lêasgielp m. _vainglory_, CP.

lêasian _to lie_, _Ps_. ['_lease_']

lêaslic _false, deceitful, sham, empty_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce, Æ, CP.

lêaslîccettan _to dissemble_, WW 388^33.

lêaslîcettung f. _dissimulation_.

lêasmôdnes f. _instability_, CP 308^6.

lêasnes f. _lying_: _levity_, BH 322^23.

lêasôleccan _to blandish, flatter_, GD 34^27.

lêasôlecung f. _empty blandishment_, WW 430^21.

lêassagol (u^3) _lying, false_, Æ.

lêasscêawere m. _spy_, B 253.

lêasspell n. _lie, fiction, fable_.

lêasspellung f. _empty talk_, AO.

lêassponung f. _allurement_, WW 452^3.

lêast = lâst

lêast- = læst-

lêastyhtan _to cajole_, WW 431^4.

lêastyhtung f. _cajolery_, WW 430^21.

lêasuht (= wiht?) _enticer, seducer_, OEG 4014

lêasung f. _'leasing,' lying, false witness, deceit, hypocrisy,
artifice_, _JnL_: _a lie_, _Ps_: _empty talk, frivolity_.

lêasungspell n. _idle tale_, AO 40^8.

lêat pret. 3 sg. of lûtan.

leatian = latian

+leaðian = +laðian

lêaðor n. _soap, soda_, _Lcd, WW_. ['_lather_']

lêaðorwyrt (lêoðo-) f. _soap-wort_? #Lcd# 16a.

lêawede = l¯æwede

lêawfinger m. _index-finger, forefinger_, #PPs# 72^11.

leax m. _salmon_, _Cp_ (æ), _Met, WW_ (e); ÆL. ['_lax_']

leb- = lef-, læf-

lec = hlec

+lec pret. 3 sg. of +lacan.

lêc I. m. _look, regard_, Æ; A 11·118^50. II. = lêac I. and II.

+lecc- = +læcc-

leccan pret. 3 sg. leahte, le(o)hte _to water, irrigate, wet, moisten,
slake_, CP. [cp. _Ger._ lechzen]

leccing f. _irrigation, watering_, _WW (KGl)_. ['_leaching_']

lêce == l¯æce

lêcetere (#KGl# 65^29) = lîcettere

±lecgan _to 'lay,' put, place, deposit, set_, _Æ, Gen, Lcd, MtL, Rd_;
CP. l. on (w. d.) _put upon, charge with_, _Chr, Gu_; CP: _bury_, Jn:
_put before, submit_, _Æ_: _betake oneself, go_. lâstas l. _go,
journey_. on lâst l. _follow_: _lay (egg)_, _Lcd_: _prostrate, cast
down, lay low, kill_, _Bo, Lk, LL_. [causative of licgan]

lêciwyrt (Cp) = l¯æcewyrt

lêcnian (NG) = lâcnian

lectric = leahtroc

lêctûn- = lêahtûn-

lecða m. '_sentina_,' #Gl#, WW.

lêd = lêad

lêdan = l¯ædan

lêde = legde, pret. 3 sg. of lecgan.

lêden == l¯æden, lêaden

lêf I. (î) _feeble, infirm, weak, injured_. II. = lêaf

lêf- = lêaf-

lêfan = (1) lîefan; (2) l¯æfan

+lêfed _weak, sickly, aged_.

lefel, lefil = læfel

+lêfenscipe m. _justification_, JnL 15^22.

lêfmon m. _sick person_, #GnE# 45.

left (K; ?= lyft*) '_inanis_,' QF 1^443.

lêft (#SPs#) = lêst, l¯æst

lêfung f. _paralysis_, ÆH 2·486^18.

leg (= læg) pret. 3 sg. of licgan.

lêg = (1) lîeg; (2) lêah

lêg- = lîg-, lêog-

lêga (A) = l¯æwa

legde pret. 3 sg. of lecgan.

+lege f? _lair, bed_, Mdf.

lêgelêoht n. _light (of flame)_, MFH 168.

legen pp. of licgan.

leger n. _lying, illness_, _AO, B_; Æ: _'lair,' couch, bed_, _Wif_:
_grave_, _LL_; Æ. cl¯æne legere _consecrated grave_. on lîfe ge on legere
_in life and in death_, LL. [licgan]

legerb¯ære _sick, ill_, TC 611^20.

legerbedd n. _bed, sick bed_, Æ: _bed of death, grave_.

+legered _confined to bed_, Æ.

legerfæst _sick, ill_, RB 64^7.

+legergield n. '_lupercalia_,' WW 437^14.

legerstôw f. _burial place_, Æ.

legertêam m. _cohabitation, marriage_.

legerwîte fm. _fine for unlawful cohabitation_, _LL_. ['_lairwite_']

lêges = lêages gs. of lêah.

legeð pres. 3 sg. of lecgan.

legie f. _legion_, AO. [_L._]

-legu v. ealdor-l.

leh- = leah-

lêh = lêah

lêh- = lêac-

lêhnan = lýgnian  [[headword spelled "lygnian"]]

lêht == lêoht

lehtan = lihtan  [[headword spelled "lîhtan"]]

lehte pret. 3 sg. of leccan.

lehtor = leahtor

lêl (#KGl#) = l¯æl

leloðre f. _silverweed_? #Gl#.

lemb = lamb

lêmen (#KGl# 82^40) = l¯æmen

±lemian (æ) _to subdue_, CP 303^11: _lame, disable_, B 905.

lempedu f. _lamprey_, _WW_ 438^17. ['_limpet_'; lampreda]

lemphealt _limping_, _Gl, WW_. ['_limphalt_']

lênan (#KGl#) = l¯ænan

lencten (æ) I. m. _springtime_, _A, Lcd_; Æ: _the fast of Lent_, W. II.
adj. _pertaining to Lent_, _A, RB_ (æ). ['_lenten_']

lenctenâdl f. _spring fever, tertian ague_.

lenctenbere m. _Lent barley_, ANS 84^326.

lenctenbryce m. _breach of the Lenten fast_, LL 344[47].

lenctendæg m. _day of Lent_.

lenctenerðe f. _land ploughed in spring_, WW 105^7. [eorðe]

lenctenfæsten n. _Lent_, Æ.

lenctenh¯æto f. _heat of spring_, AO 102^6?

lenctenlic _of spring, vernal_, Æ: _lenten_, Æ.

lenctenlifen f. _Lenten fare_, NC 306.

lenctensufel (længt-) n. _Lent food_, LL 450[9].

lenctentîd f. _spring, Lent_, Æ.

lenctentîma m. _spring_, OEG 3837.

lenctenwuce f. _a week in Lent_.

lenctin- = lencten-

+lend I. _furnished with land (by the lord)_, LL 448´. II. = +lynd

+lenda m. _one rich in land_, OEG 3154.

lendan _to land, arrive_, _Chr_; Æ, AO, CP: (+) _endow with land_, Æ.
['_lend_'; land]

lende- = lenden-

lendenbân n. _loin-bone_, _WW_ 159^13. ['_lendbone_']

lenden-br¯æde, -brêde f. _loin_.

lendensîd _reaching to the loins_, NC 306.

lendenu (æ) np. _loins, reins_, _Mt, WW_; Æ. ['_lend_'; _Ger._ lenden]

lendenwyrc m. _a disease of the kidneys_, WW 113^12. [wærc]

-lendisc v. dûn-, ûp-, ûre-, ût-l.

lêne = l¯æne

leng I. (æ) f. _length, height_, Æ. II. adv. (comp. of lange) _longer_,
_Æ, Lk_. ['_leng_']

±lengan _to lengthen, prolong, protract, delay_, _Da_: _extend, reach,
attain_: _belong_. ['_leng_']

lengcten- = lencten-

lenge (æ) I. adj. (±) _belonging, related_: _near (of time)_, B 83. II.
v. lange.

+lenge _belonging to, related to_, Æ: _addicted to_.

lengest (_Chr, Mk_) superl. of lang, lange. ['_lengest_']

lengfære _more durable_, ANS 119·435.

lengian (impers. w. a.) _to long for, ask for_, #Sol# 270 (GK).

lenglîfra comp. of langlîfe.

lengo = lengu

lengra (_BH_) comp. of lang. ['_lenger_']

lengten == lencten

lengtogra comp. adj. _drawn out farther, more prolix_, #Sc# 161^18.

lengðu f. '_length_,' _AO_ 144^1.

lengu f. _length_, _Bo, BH_: _height_, _Sol_. ['_lengh_']

lent f. _lentil_, #Gl#. [_L._ lentem]

lenten = lencten

lêo mf. gdas. lêon, also ds. lêone, lêonan, asf. lêo, and dp. lêonum
_'lion,' lioness_, _AO_, Æ. [_L._]

lêoc (WW 283^21) = lêac

lêod I. m. _man_, LL 14[25]: 'wergeld' _for manslaughter_, LL (=
lêodgeld): (+) _fellow-countryman, compatriot_: (¶) _chief, prince,
king_, _B_. ['_lede_'] II. f. (usu. in pl. lêode) _people, nation_, _B,
Bl_; Æ, AO. ['_lede_']

leoda = lida

lêoda I. = +lêod I. II. (LWS) = lêode

lêodan^2 _to spring up, grow_: _spring from_.

lêodbealu ¶ n. _calamity to a people_.

lêodbisceop m. _suffragan bishop, provincial_, Æ.

lêodburg ¶ f. _town_.

lêodbygen f. _sale of one's compatriots, slave-traffic_, LL 20[11Ld]
(v. 2·133).

lêodcyning m. _king, ruler_, B 54.

lêode fp. _men, people, country_, _B, Lk_; AO (v. lêod).

lêoden = lýden

lêodfruma ¶ m. _prince, patriarch, chief_.

lêodgeard ¶ m. _country_.

lêodgebyrga ¶ m. _lord, protector, prince, king_.

lêodgeld n. 'wergeld' _for manslaughter_, LL.

lêodgeðincð f. _order, rank_, LL.

lêodgewinn n. _strife_, #Jul# 201.

lêodgota = lêadgeota

lêodgryre m. _general terror_, #Sol# 278.

lêodhata m. _persecutor, tyrant_, GD.

lêodhete ¶ m. _popular hatred, hostility_.

lêodhryre ¶ m. _fall of a prince_ (_or nation_?), B 2030, 2391.

lêodhwæt _very valiant_, #El# 11.

-lêodisc v. ðider-l.

lêodm¯æg ¶ m. _relative, comrade_.

lêodmægen ¶ n. _might of the people, host power, virtue_.

lêodmearc ¶ f. _domain, country_.

lêodr¯æden f. _country, region_, GD 204^23.

lêodriht n. _law of the land_.

lêodrûne f. _pythoness, sorceress_.

lêodscearu f. _tribe, nation_, #Ex# 337.

lêodsceaða ¶ m. _public enemy_.

lêodscipe m. _nation, people_, Æ: _country, region_.

lêodstefn m. _race, tribe_, #PPs# 82^7.

lêodðêaw m. _popular usage_.

lêodweard ¶ f. _government_.

lêodweras ¶ mp. _men, human beings_.

lêodwerod n. _host of people_, #Ex# 77.

lêodwita m. _wise man, elder, chief_, LL 456.

lêodwynn f. _home joy_, ¶Hy 4^89.

lêodwyrhta = lêoðwyrhta

lêof I. adj. _dear, valued, beloved, pleasant, agreeable_, _Æ, B, Chr,
CP_. II. m. _beloved one, friend_: (in addressing persons) _sir! sire!
Æ, EC_: _impure companion_, GPH 394. ['_lief_']

leofen = lifen

leofian (_Bl_) = libban

lêofian _to be or become dear_, #Gu# 110.

lêoflic _dear, lovable, pleasant, beautiful, delightful_, _B_:
_precious, valued_. adv. -lîce _lovingly, kindly, gladly, willingly_,
_BH_. ['_liefly_']

lêofspell n. _good news_, #El# 1017.

lêof-t¯æl, -t¯æle _kind, lovable, loving, dear, grateful, agreeable_, CP.

lêofwende _kind, loving, gracious, acceptable, estimable, agreeable_.

lêofwendum _ardently_.

±lêogan^2 _to 'lie,'_ _Bl, WW_: (w. d.) _deceive, belie, betray_, Æ, CP:
_be in error_, #ÆGr#.

lêogere (e^1, o^2) m. _'liar,' false witness_, _W, MtL_; Æ: _hypocrite_,
MkL 7^6.

lêoht (ê, î) I. _'light,' not heavy_, _AO, BH, Rd_; CP: _slight, easy,
trifling, inconsiderable_, _CP, Mt, Lcd_: _quick, agile_, _Ph_:
_gentle_, _Wid_. II. n. _'light,' daylight_, _Æ, B, Bl, Chr, G, Ps, W_:
_power of vision_, _Bl_: _luminary_, _Lcd_. III. _luminous, bright_,
_'light,' clear, resplendent, beautiful_, _BH, Lcd, VPs_; AO, CP.

lêohtan = lîhtan

lêohtb¯ære _brilliant, luminous_.

lêohtbêamede _bright-shining_, ÆH 1·610.

lêohtberend m. _light-bearer, Lucifer_, Æ.

lêohtberende _light-bearing, luminous_, Æ.

lêohtbora m. _light-bearer_, LV 36.

lêohtbr¯ædnes f. _levity, frivolity, wantonness_.

leohte = lehte, pret. 3 sg. of leccan.

lêohte I. adv. _lightly, easily, comfortably_, _BH_. ['_light_'] II.
adv. _brightly, clearly, brilliantly_, _Bl, Cr_. ['_light_']

lêoht-fæt n. nap. -fatu _lantern, torch, lamp, light_, Æ, CP.

lêohtfætels m. _lamp_, #LPs# 17^29.

lêohtfruma ¶ m. _source of light_.

lêoht-gesceot, -gescot n. _payment for providing lights in church_.

lêohtian I. _to be lightened, relieved_. II. _to become light, dawn_, CM
474: (¶) _give light, illuminate_.

lêohting = lîhting

lêohtîsern (ê^1, NG) n. _candlestick_.

lêohtlêas _devoid of light, dark_, _Æ_. ['_lightless_']

lêohtlic I. _light, of little weight or importance_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce
_lightly, slightly_, _BH, Lcd_: _inconsiderately_: _easily, quickly_:
_gently, softly, slowly_, _CP_; Æ. ['_lightly_'] II. _bright, radiant_,
_Rd_.

leohtmôd _easy-going_, #GnE# 86.

leohtmôdnes f. _levity, inconstancy, frivolity_, CP.

lêohtsâwend _author of light_, GPH 389^2.

lêohtscêawigend _light-seeing_, WW 434^20.

lêohtsceot = lêohtgesceot

lêohtwyrhta = lêoðwyrhta

leolc pret. 3 sg. of lâcan.

±lêoma m. _ray of light, beam, radiance, gleam, glare_, _B_; Æ:
_lightning_.

±lêoman, lêomian? _to shine_, SkED.  [[from first edition]]

+lêomod _having rays of light_, #Lcd# 3·272^4.

leomu nap. of lim.

lêon I. (sv^1) _to lend, grant_. [_Ger._ leihen] II. gdas. of lêo.

lêona mf. _lion, lioness_, Æ.

lêonesêað m. _lions' den_, GD 150^9.

lêonfl¯æsc n. _lion's flesh_, _Lcd_ 1·364. [v. '_lion_']

lêonfôt m. _lion's foot (plant)_.

lêonhwelp m. _lion's cub_, WW 434^6.

±lêoran (wv., but rare pp. loren) _to go, depart, pass, vanish, die_
(A; v. JAW 44).

±lêorednes f. _departure, transmigration_: _death_, ÆL: _vision_.

lêorende, +lêorendlic _transitory_.

leornan = leornian

leornere m. _'learner,' disciple_, Æ, CP: _scholar_, _BH_: _reader_.

lêornes = lêorednes

±leornian _to 'learn,' read, study, think about_, _Æ, BH, MkR_; AO, CP.

leorningcild n., leorningcniht (Æ, CP) m. _student, disciple_.

leorningende _teachable_.

leorninghûs n. _school_, WW.

leornung f., ds. leornunga _'learning,' reading, study, meditation_,
CP; AO.

leornungcræft m. _learning_, #El# 380.

leornungmann m. _learner, disciple (used even of women)_, Æ.

leornungscôl f. _school_, GD 14^6.

leort pret. 3 sg. of l¯ætan.

lêosca (ê) m. _groin_.

leoð = leoðu v. lið.

leoð- = lið-

lêoð n. _song, lay, poem_, _B, WW_; Æ, AO. ['_leoth_'; _Ger._ lied]

lêoðcræft m. _poetic art or skill_: _poem, poetry_, Æ.

lêoðcræftig _skilled in song_, #Deor# 40.

lêoðcwide m. _lay, poem_, AO 120^2.

leoðe- = leoðu-

lêoðgidding f. _lay, song, poem_, #An# 1481.

lêoðian ¶ _to sing, recite_: _sound forth, resound_.

lêoðlic _versified_, ÆH 2·134.

leoðo- = leoðu-

lêoðorûn f. _wise counsel given in song_, #El# 522.

lêoðowyrt = lêaðorwyrt?

lêoðrian = hlêoðrian

lêoðsang m. _song, poem, poetry_, BH.

leoðu I. f. _retinue, following_? #Rim# 14 (GK). II. v. lið.

leoðubend ¶ mf. _chain, fetter, bond_.

leoðuc¯æge f. _limbs which served as a key_, #Cr# 334.

leoðucræft ¶ m. _skill of hand_.

lêoðucræft = lêoðcræft

leoðucræftig _agile_, #Ph# 268.

leoðufæst _able, skilful_, #Cra# 95.

leoðulic _appertaining to the limbs, bodily_.

leoðusâr n. _pain in the limbs_, WW 213^8.

leoðusyrce ¶ f. _corslet_.

leoðuwâc (i) _with supple limbs, flexible, pliant_, _Cra_ 84.
['_leathwake_']

leoðuwâcian _to mitigate_.

leoðuwâcunga (liðe-)? '_compeditorum_,' #EPs# 78^11.

±leoðuw¯æcan _to become pliant, be submissive, grow calm, soften_.

lêoðweorc n. _poetry_, WW 188^30.

lêoðwîse f. _verse, poetry_, Æ.

lêoðword n. _a word in a poem_, #An# 1490.

lêoðwrence m. _poem_, A 8·334.

lêoðwyrhta m. _poet_, #ÆGr#.

lêow (¯æu) n. _ham, thigh_.

-lêow (ê, â) v. mund-l.

leowe f. _league (distance)_, WW 147^22.

lêower pl. of lêow.

lepewince = læpewince

leppan _to feed (a hawk)_, #Wy# 89 (v. ES 37·195).

lêran (#KGl#) = l¯æran

lere (#KGl# 83^19) = lyre

lêrêow- = lârêow-

lês- = lîes-

lesan^5 _to collect, pick, select, gather, glean_, Æ. ['_lease_'; _Ger._
lesen]

lêsca = lêosca

-lesende, -lesendlic, -lesung v. ed-l.

lêst = lâst

lesu = lysu

lêsw- = l¯æsw-

lêt I. pret. 3 sg. of l¯ætan. II. = l¯æt pres. 3 sg. of l¯ædan.
III. = lêat pret. of lûtan.

lêtan = l¯ætan

lêtanîa m. _litany_. [_L._ litania]

letig (#KGl#) = lytig

±lettan (æ) _to 'let,' hinder, delay, impede, oppress_, _Æ, Bo, Gu_
(w. g.), _W_; AO, CP.

lettend m. _hinderer_, ES 39·349.

letting (æ) f. _'letting,' hindrance, delay_, _RB_; CP.

lêð = l¯æð

-leðer v. heals-, weald-l.

leðera = liðera  [[under "liðere"]]

leðercodd m. _leather bag_, _WW_ 117^3. [v. '_leather_']

leðeren = leðren

leðerhelm m. _leathern helmet_, WW 142^1.

leðerhose f. _leathern gaiter_, WW.

leðern = leðren

leðerwyrhta m. _leather-maker, tanner, currier_, #Gl#.

lêðr- = lýðr-

leðren (i) '_leathern_,' _WW_.

lêud = (1) lêod; (2) l¯æwede

lêw f? _weakness_, W 165^9 (cp. lêf I.).

+lêwed _weak, ill_? Æ (#Ex# 22^10, cp. liml¯æweo or ? read +lêfed.

lêwend = l¯æwend

lêwer = lêower

lêwsa m. _weakness_: '_inops_,' #EPs# 139^13 (hlêw-). [lêf I.]

lex = leax

lêxnian (WW 241^21) = lâcnian

lib- = lif-

libb- = lyb-

libban (y) pret. 3 sg. lif(e)de _to 'live,' be, exist_, _Æ, B, BH, Lcd,
VPs_; AO, CP.

libr- = lifer-

lîc n. _body_, _B, Cr_: _corpse_, _AO, B_; Æ, CP. ['_lich_'; _Ger._
leiche]

+lîc adj. (w. d.) _'alike,' similar, equal_, _Mt_; Æ, CP. +lîcost
_double, twin_.

+lîca, +lîce wk. forms used as sb. _an equal_, Æ, CP. adv. ±lîce (usu.
+; and +lîc in NG), _Bl_. +lîce and _like as if_.

lîcam- = lîcham-

lîcbeorg f. _coffin, sarcophagus_, Cp 45#s#.

+lîcbisnung f. _imitation_, DR 76^1.

lîcburg f. _cemetery_, Cp 433#c#.

liccere, liccetere = lîcettere

liccettan (Æ) = lîcettan

liccian _to 'lick,'_ _Æ, Ps_: _lap, lick up_, _Lcd_.

liccung f. _licking_, ÆH 1·330^22.

lîcema = lîchama

lîcendlic == lîciendlic

lîcettan _to feign, pretend, dissimulate_, CP: _flatter_, BH.

lîcettere m. _deceiver, hypocrite_, CP.

lîcettung, lîcetung f. _feigning, deceit, hypocrisy, flattery_.

lîcewyrðe = lîcwyrðe

lîcfæt ¶ n. _body_.

licgan^5 (±) _to 'lie,' be situated, be at rest, remain, be_, _Ph_; Æ,
AO, CP: (±) _lie down, lie low, yield, subside, lie prostrate, fail, lie
dead_, _Æ, AO, B, Chr, G_: _lead, extend to_, _Æ_; AO: _flow, go, run_,
AO: _belong to_. l. for _take the part of_, LL 152[3]. l. mid _cohabit
with_. wið licgendum fêo _for ready money_.

lîchama m. _body, corpse_, _Bo, Mt_; Æ, CP. ['_licham_'; _Ger._
leichnam]

lîchamlêas _incorporeal_, Æ.

lîchamlic (o^2) _corporeal, bodily, carnal, material_, _Bo, Lk_; Æ. adv.
-lîce _bodily, personally, in the flesh_, _BH_; Æ. ['_lichamly_']

+lîchamod _incarnate_.

-lîchamung v. in-l.  [[headword spelled "inlîchomung"]]

lîchom- = lîcham-

lîchord ¶ n. _interior of the body_.

lîchrægel n. _winding-sheet_, MH 76^26.

lîchryre m. _bodily decay, death_, #Gen# 1099.

lîchryst = lîcrest

lîchwamlic = lîchamlic

lîcian (w. d. or impers.) _to please_, _Æ, Bl, Bo_; CP. ['_like_']

lîciendlic _agreeable, pleasant_. adv. -lîce.

+lîcl¯ætan^7 _to liken, compare_, MkLR 4^30.

lîclêoð n. _dirge_, OEG.

lîclic _relating to the dead, funeral_, GPH 401.

+lîclic _fitting, proper_. adv. -lîce _equally_.

lîcmann m. _bearer, pall-bearer_, Æ.

lîcnes (±) f. _'likeness' ('i-likeness'), figure, stature, image_, _Æ,
MtL_: (+) _parable_.

lîcpytt m. _sepulchre, grave_, #ÆGr# 66^10? (or ? dîc, pytt).

lîcrest f. _sepulchre, tomb_, Æ: _'carrum,' hearse_, ÆL 26^181.

lîcs- = lîx-

lîcsang m. _dirge_, OEG.

lîcsâr ¶ n. _wound_.

lîcstôw f. _place of burial_, GD 340^35.

lîcsyrce f. _corslet_, B 550.

lîctûn m. _burial-ground_, Æ.

lîcðênung f. _obsequies, funeral_, Æ: _laying out (of corpse)_, ÆL
31^1429.

lîcðêote f. _pore_, WW 159^13.

lîcðrôwere m. _leper_, Æ.

lîcðrûh f. _coffin_, GD.

lîcum- = lîcham-

±lîcung f. _pleasure_, _CP_. ['_liking_']

lîcwîglung f. _necromancy_, LL (248^3).

lîcwund f. _wound_, #Ex# 239.

±lîcwyrðe (e, eo, o, u) _pleasing, acceptable_, _Bo_; CP: _estimable,
praiseworthy_: _accepted, recognised, sterling_. ['_likeworth_']

lîcwyrðlîce _pleasingly_, Æ.

lîcwyrðnes f. _good pleasure_, #LPs# 88^18.

lid ¶ n. _ship, vessel_. [lîðan]

lida ¶ m. _sailor_.

liden pp. of lîðan.

lîdeð pres. 3 sg. of lêodan.

lidmann ¶ m. _seafarer, sailor, pirate_.

lidrin = leðren

lidweard m. _ship-master_, #An# 244.

lidwêrig _weary of sea-voyages_, #An# 482.

lîefan (ê, î, ý) _to allow, grant, concede_, _Mt_ (ý), _CP_. ['_leve_';
lêaf]

±lîefan (ê, êo, î, ý) tr. and intr. _to believe, trust, confide in_,
_Bl, MH_ (ý). ['_leve_']

+lîefed (ý) _believing, faithful, pious_, Æ.

+lîefedlic _permissible_, LL (436^30).

+lîefedlîce _trustfully, credulously_, AO (ý).

+lîefen _excused_, LkR 14^19 (ê).

+lîefenscipe m. _justification_, JnLR 15^22.

lîeffæstan = lîffæstan

lîeg (¯æ, ê, î) mn. _fire, flame, lightning_, _B, Bl_ (ê); CP. ['_leye_']

lîeget = lîget

liegeð I. = legeð pres. 3 sg. of lecgan. II. pres. 3 sg. of licgan.

lîeht- = lêoht-, lîht-

lîehð pres. 3 sg. of lêogan.

±lîesan (ê, ý) _to loosen, release, deliver, liberate_, _Cr_ (ý), _LkR_
(ê). ['_leese_']

+lîesednes (ý) f. _redemption_.

lîesing I. (î, ý) m. _freedman_, LL. II. f. _deliverance, release_, LkL
(ê). ['_leesing_']

+lîesnes (ê, î) f. _redemption_.

lîeð- = lîð-

lîexan = lîxan

lîf I. n. _'life,' existence_, _Æ, B, Chr, JnL_: _lifetime_, _RB_. on
lîfe, tô lîfe, lîfes _alive_, _BH_: _way of life (e.g. monastic)_, _BH,
Chr, Lk, W_; CP: _place where the life is according to fixed rules,
monastery_, #Chr#. II. = lêf. III. = lêaf I.

lîf- = lîef-

lîfbrycgung f. _conversation, way of life_, DR 7^15.

lîfbysig _struggling for life_, B 966.

lîfcearu ¶ f. _care about life_.

lîfdæg m. nap. lîfdagas (usu. in plur.) _'life-day,' lifetime_, _B, Cr_.

lifde, lifede pret. sg. of libban.

lifen f. _food, nourishment_.  [[from first edition]]

lifer I. f. '_liver_,' _Bo, WW_; Æ. II. f. _a weight_, WW 432^28. [_L._
libra?]

liferâdl f. _liver complaint_, #Lcd#, WW.

liferbýl m. _protuberance of the liver_, #Lcd# 76b.

liferhol n. _hollow in the liver_, #Lcd# 76b.

liferlæppa m. _lobe of the liver_, WW.

liferwærc m. _pain in the liver_, #Lcd# 60a.

liferwyrt n. _liverwort_, ANS 84·326.

lifesn = lyfesn

lîffadung f. _regulation of life_.

lîffæc n. _lifetime, life_, LL, W.

±lîffæst _living, quickened, full of life, vigorous_: _settled_.

±lîffæstan _to quicken, endow with life_, Æ.

+lîffæstnian _to quicken_, #RPs# 142^11.

liffet- = lyffet-

lîffrêa ¶ m. _Lord of life, God_.

lîffruma ¶ m. _source of life (God)_.

lifgan = libban

lîfgedâl n. _death_, GD.

lîfgesceaft ¶ f. _life's conditions or record_.

lîfgetwinnan mp. _twins_, #Sol# 141.

lifian ¶ (A) = libban

lifiende (y) _that lives or has life_, _BH_: _when alive_, _BH, VPs_: as
sb. _the 'living,'_ _VHy_.

lîflâd f. _course of life, conduct_, _RB_. ['_livelihood_']

lîfl¯æst = lîflêast

lîflêas _not endowed with life_, _'lifeless,' inanimate_, _Æ_: _dead_,
_Æ_.

lîflêast f. _loss of life, annihilation, death_, Æ.

lîflic _living_, _Æ_: _necessary to life, vital_, _Hex, DHy_. adv. -lîce
_vitally, so as to impart life_, _Æ_. ['_lively_']

lîflyre m. _loss of life_, LL 466[2].

lîfneru f. _food, sustenance_, #An# 1091.

lifre gs. of lifer I.

lifre- = lifer-

lifrig _clotted_? A 30·132.

lift = lyft

lîfweard m. _guardian of life_, #El# 1036.

lîfweg m. _way of life, way in life_.

lîfwela ¶ m. _riches_.

lîfwelle _living (of water)_, JnL 4^10.

lîfwraðu ¶ f. _protection of life_.

lîfwynn ¶ f. _enjoyment of life_.

lîg (Æ) = lîeg

lig- = lyg-

lîgb¯ære, lîgberend _flaming_, #Gl#.

lîgbryne ¶ m. _burning, fire_.

lîgbysig (ê) _busy with fire_, #Rd# 31^1.

lîgcwalu f. _fiery torment_, #El# 296.

lîgdraca (ê) ¶ m. _fiery dragon_.

lîgegesa m. _flaming terror_, B 2780.

lîgen (ê) _flaming, fiery_, Æ.

ligenword = lygeword

+lig-er, -ere n., -ernes f. _concubinage, fornication, adultery_, AO.

lîget nm., lîgetu (ê) f. _lightning, flash of lightning_, _BH, Bl, Mt_;
Æ, AO. ['_lait_'; lîeg]

lîgetræsc m. _lightning, flash of light, coruscation_, Lk 10^18. [lîget]

lîgetsleht (ê^1, æ^3) f. _lightning-stroke, thunder-bolt_.

lîgetung f. _lightning_, EHy 6^41.

ligeð pres. 3 sg. of licgan.

lîg-f¯æmende, -fâmblâwende _vomiting fire_, BH 432^7.

lîgfýr n. _fire_, #Ex# 77.

ligge = lîege ds. of lîeg.

lîgit = lîget

lîglic (ê) _fiery_, #Guth# 131^196.

lîg-locc, -locced _having flaming locks_, WW.

lîgnian = lýgnian  [[headword spelled "lygnian"]]

lîgræsc (ê^1, e^2) = lîgetræsc

lîg-ræscetung, -ræscung (ý^1) f. _lightning_.

lîgspîwel _vomiting flame_.

ligð pres. 3 sg. of licgan.

lîg-ðracu ¶ f. gds. -ðræce _fiery onset, violence of flames_.

lîgýð f. _wave of fire_, B 2672.

lîh imperat. sg. of lêon.

lîht == lêoht

lîhtan (ê, êo, ý) I. (±) _to make _'light_,' easy, relieve, alleviate_,
_CP, Lcd, LL_: _dismount, 'alight,'_ _BH_ (y). II. (ie, ý) _to lighten,
illuminate, give light, shine_, _Æ, Jn_ (ý): _grow light, dawn_, _Da_
(ý): '_light,' kindle_.

lîhting I. f. _relief, alleviation, release_, _LL_. ['_lihting_'] II.
(êo) f. _shining, illumination, light_, _Æ_: _dawn_: _lightning_.
['_lihting_']

lîhtingnes f. _lightness of taxation_, LL (306^21).

lîhtnes f. _brightness_, _W_ 230^12. ['_lightness_']

lîhð pres. 3 sg. of lêogan.

lilie f. '_lily_,' _Bl, Lcd_; Æ. [_L._ lilium]

lim (y) n. nap. leomu _'limb,' member_, _Æ, BH, Bl_; AO, CP: _branch_,
_B_: _agent, offspring_? _Bl_, 33: _bone_? #CPs# 6^3.

lîm m. _anything sticky_, _'lime,' mortar, cement, gluten_, _Ep, WW_.

+lîman _to cement, join, stick together_.

limbstefning f. _hanging, curtain_, WW 191^32.

lîmfîn f. _lime-heap_, BC 1·518^41.

limgelecg n. _shape_, WW.

limgesihð f. _body_, A 2·364.

limhâl _sound of limb_, #Gu# 661.

+lîmian = +lîman

lîming f. _smearing, plastering_, _WW_. ['_liming_']

liml¯æw f. _injury to the limbs, mutilation_, LL (278^26).

liml¯æweo _maimed_, LL 132[10].

limlêas _without limbs_, Æ 2·270^22.

limm¯ælum adv. _'membratim,' limb by limb_, _WW_. ['_limbmeal_']

limmlama _crippled_, W 4^12.

limnacod _stark naked_, #Gen# 1566.

+limp n. _occurrence_: _misfortune, accident_, CP.

±limpan^3 _to happen, occur_, _B, Bo, Chr, Met_; Æ, AO, CP: _belong to,
suit, befit_, _OET, Ct_: _concern_, CP. ['_limp_,' '_i-limp_']

±limpful _fitting, convenient_, AS 2^1.

limpl¯æcan _to unite, connect_, OEG 80.

+limplic _fitting, suitable_, ÆL. adv. -lîce (±).

+limplicnes f. _opportunity_.

limr¯æden f. _cloak_? _form_? _disposition of the limbs_? v. OEG 2530.

limsêoc ¶ _lame, paralytic_.

limw¯æde n. _clothing_, #PPs# 103^2.

limwæstm m. _stature_, #Sat# 130.

limwêrig _weary of limb_, #Rood# 63.

lîn n. _flax, linen, cloth, napkin, towel_, _Gl, JnR, MtR_; CP.
['_line_']

lînacer m. _flax field_, EC 239.

lind I. f. _lime-tree, linden_, _Gl_; Æ; Mdf: (¶) _shield (of wood)_.
['_lind_'] II. = lynd

lindcroda § m. _crash of shields, battle_.

linde _lime-tree, linden_.

linden _made of 'linden'-wood_, _GnE_.

lindgecrod n. _shield-bearing troop_, #An# 1222.

lindgelâc n. _battle_, #Ap# 76.

lindgestealla ¶ m. _shield-comrade, companion in war_.

lindhæbbende ¶ m. _shield-bearer, warrior_.

lindplega ¶ m. _shield-play, battle_.

lindrycg m. _ridge where limes grow_, KC 3·79^20.

lindwered n. _troop armed with shields_, #El# 142.

lindwiga m. _warrior_, B 2603.

lind-wîgend ¶, -wiggend ¶ m. _shielded warrior_.

lîne f. _line, cable, rope_, _Sol, WW_: _series, row_: _rule,
direction_.

lînece (WW 286^21) = lînete

lînen adj. _'linen,' made of flax_, _Ep_; Æ, CP.

lînenhrægl n. _linen cloth_, NG.

lînenwerd _dressed in linen_, LL (370^11).

lînete (-ece) f. _linnet_, WW 286^21.

lînet-wige, -wigle f. _linnet_, _Cp, Erf, WW_. ['_lintwhite_']

-ling suffix (1) for forming personal nouns (dêorling, r¯æpling). (2) for
forming advbs. (hinderling).

lînh¯æwen _flax-coloured_, #Lcd#.

lînland n. _land in flax_, KC 3·19^4.

lînlêag m. _flax ground_, EC 166.

linnan^3 (w. instr. or g.) _to cease from, desist, lose, yield up
(life)_, _B_. ['_lin_']

lîns¯æd n. '_linseed_,' _A_ (e^2), _Lcd_.

lînw¯æd f. _linen cloth or garment_, NG.

lînwyrt f. _flax_, #Lcd#.

lîo (WW 438^22) = lêo

lippa m., lippe? f. (LL 2·136) '_lip_,' _Lcd, RB, WW_.

lîra m. _any fleshy part of the body, muscle, calf of the leg_, WW.

+lire = +ligere  [[under "+liger"]]

lîreht _fleshy_, #Lcd# 91a.

lîs = liss

lîs- = lîes-

lisan (#Gl#) = lesan

+lise (e) nap. +leosu n. _reading, study_, BH.

+lîsian _to slip, glide_, CP 437.

-lisnian, -listnian v. be-l.

liss (lîðs) f. _grace, favour, love, kindness, mercy_, Æ: _joy, peace,
rest_, _Ph, W_: _remission, forgiveness_: _saving (of life)_. ['_liss_';
lîðe]

lîssian _to subdue_, #Sol# 294.

list mf. _art, cleverness, cunning, experience, skill, craft_, _Cr_.
['_list_'] listum _cunningly, skilfully_.

listan = lystan

lîste f. _'list,' fringe, border_, _Ep_.

listelîce adv. _carefully_, #Lcd# 11a.

listhendig _skilful_, #Cra# 95.

listum v. list.

listwrenc m. _deception_, W 81; 128^9.

lisð pres. 3 sg. of lesan.

lit _colour, dye_, NC 306 (late).

lît = lýt

lîtan _to bend, incline_, #Met# 26^119.

lite- = lytig-

lîtel = lýtel

litig = lytig

litigere m. _dyer_, NC 306 (late).

lîtl- = lýtl-

litsmann = liðsmann

lið I. nm. nap. leoðu, liðu _limb, member_, _BH, Cr_; Æ, AO, CP:
_joint_, _Lcd_. ['_lith_'] II. n. _fleet_. [_ON._ lið]

lîð I. n. _cider, native wine, fermented drink_, CP: _beaker, cup_. II.
pres. 3 sg. of licgan. III. = lîðe adj. IV. = lîhð

lîða m. _name of months June_ (¯ærra l.) _and July_ (æftera l.).

liðâdl f. _gout_, #Lcd#, WW.

lîðan^1 _to go, travel, sail_, _B, BH_. ['_lithe_']

lîðe I. adj. _gentle, soft, calm, mild_, _ApT, B, Mt_; Æ, AO, CP:
_gracious, kind, agreeable, sweet_, _Bo, Gen_; Æ. ['_lithe_'] II. adv.
_gently, softly_.

liðe- = leoðu-

liðebîge _flexible, yielding_, _Æ_. ['_litheby_']

liðebîgnes f. _flexibility of limbs_, #Guth# 90^21.

lîðeg == lîðig

lîðelic _gentle, soft, mild_, CP. adv. -lîce, _CP_. ['_lithely_']

+liðen (y) _having travelled much_. [lîðan]

lîðercian _to smooth down, flatter_, #Gl#.

liðere f., liðera m. _sling, slinging pouch_, _BH, Cp_; Æ. ['_lither_';
leðer]

liðeren = leðren

liðerlic _of a sling_, WW 247^4.

+liðewâcian _to calm, appease, mitigate_, ÆL.

liðew¯æcan = leoðuw¯æcan

liðgeat = hlidgeat

lîðian (_CP_; Æ) = lîðigian

+liðian (eo) _to incline, accustom_, A 2·68.

lîðig _lithe, flexible, bending, yielding_, _Æ, W_. ['_lithy_']

lîðigian (±) _to soften, calm, assuage, appease_, _CP_; Æ: _be mild_.
['_lithe_']

liðincel n. _little joint_, WW.

lîðlic = lîðelic

liðmann = lidmann

lîðnes f. _mildness, softness, gentleness, kindness_, Æ, CP.

liðo- = leoðu-

liðre = liðere

lîðre = lýðre

liðrin = leðren

lîðs = liss

liðsêaw n. _synovia_.

liðsmann m. _seafarer, pirate_, #Chr#.

liðu v. lið.

liðule m? _synovia_, #Lcd#. [lið, ele]

lîðung f. _alleviation, relief_, #Lcd# 1·112^2.

lîðw¯æge n. _drinking-cup_, B 1982.

liðwærc m. _pain in the limbs_, #Lcd# 49b.

lîðwyrde _mild of speech_, NC 348.

lîðwyrt f. _dwarf elder_.

lîxan _to shine, flash, glitter, gleam_.

lîxende _splendidly_, LkL 16^19.

lîxung f. _brilliance, brightness_, N.

-lô pl. -lôn v. mæst-, sceaft-l.  [["mæastlô" under "mæstlôn"]]

lob (#Gl#) = lof

lobbe f. _spider_, _LPs_. ['_lob_']

loc I. n. _'lock' bolt, bar_, _Æ, BH_; AO: _enclosure, fold, prison,
stronghold_, CP: _bargain, agreement, settlement, conclusion_. [lûcan]
II. = locc I.

lôc, lôca interj. _look, see, look you_. l. hû _however_. l. hwænne,
hwonne _whenever_. spel l. hwænne mann wille _a discourse for any
occasion you please_, Æ. l. hw¯ær _wherever_. l. hw¯æðer _whichever_.
l. hwâ, l. hwæt, _whoever, whatever_. l. hwylc _whichever_.

loca m. _enclosure, stronghold_.

lôca-hû v. lôc interj.

locbore f. _one who wears long hair, free woman_, LL 7[73].

locc I. m. _'lock' of (hair)_, _hair, curl_, _Bl, CP, Ep_; Æ. II. =
loc I.

loccad '_crinitus_,' OEG 56^13.

loccetan (MtL) ?= rocettan (JAW 77).

±loccian _to attract, entice, soothe_, CP.

locen I. pp. of lûcan. II. (#Sat# 300?) = loc

locer = locor

locfeax n. _hair_, WW 379^42.

locgewind n. _hair_, WW 199^7.

lôc-hû, -hwænne etc. v. lôc hû, lôc hwænne, etc.

lochyrdel m. _sheepfold_, LL 454[9].

lôcian (±) _to see, behold, look, gaze_, _Æ, Bl, CP, Mt_; AO: _observe,
notice, take heed_, _Bl_; Æ. l. tô _regard with favour_, _CP_: _belong,
pertain_, Æ.

locor _plane_, #Gl#.

locstân m. _keystone_, ÆL 23^345.

-lôcung v. ðurh-l.

loddere m. _beggar_, Æ; Mdf. [lýðre]

+lodr f. _backbone, spine_, #Lcd# 65a.

lodrung f. _rubbish, nonsense_, WW 478^8.

+lodwyrt f. _silverweed_.

loerge (Ep) np. of lorg.

lof I. n. (m. _B_ 1536) _praise, glory, repute_, _Cp_; Æ, CP: _song of
praise, hymn_. ['_lof_'] II. ¶ n. _protection, help_.

lôf (OEG 5241) = glôf (?), v. ES 37·186.

lofb¯ære _praising, giving praise_.

lofd¯æd f. _praiseworthy deed_, B 24.

lofgeorn _eager for praise_, ÆL 16^302: _lavish_? RB 54^9; 55^3.

lofherung f. _praising_, #LPs# 55^12.

lofian _to praise, exalt_, _Gen, PPs_; CP: _appraise, value_. ['_love_']

loflâc n. _offering in honour of any one_, W 107^6.

lofl¯æcan _to praise_, #LPs# 118^175.

loflic _laudable_. adv. -lîce _gloriously_.

lofmægen n. _praise_, #PPs# 105^2.

lofsang m. _song of praise, canticle, hymn, psalm_, _BH_; Æ: _lauds_.
['_lofsang_']

lofsealm m. _the 148th Psalm_, RB 36^19.

lofsingende _singing hymns of praise_, OEG 4912.

lofsum _praiseworthy_, #Gen# 468.

lofte (on) adv. phr. _in the air, aloft_, _Hex, MLN_. ['_loft_']

lofung f. _praising, laudation_: _appraising_, Æ.

lôg pret. 3 sg. of lêan.

-loga v. âð-, trêow-, word-l. [leogan]  [[headword spelled "lêogan"]]

lôges v. lôh.

logeðer = logðer

±lôgian _to lodge, place, put by_, Æ: _put in order, arrange_, Æ:
_discourse_, Æ: _divide, portion out_. +l. ûp _lay by, deposit_. +logod
spr¯æc (_well_)-_ordered speech, style_.

logðer (o^2) _cunning, artful_, WW.

+logung f. _order_, CM 599.

lôh I. n., gs. lôges _place, stead_ (only in phr. on his lôh). II. pret.
3 sg. of lêan II.

lôhsceaft m. _bolt, bar_? AS 1^2.

loma = lama

±lôma m. _tool, utensil, article of furniture_, _BH_; #Gl#. ['_loom_']

lomb, lomber = lamb

±lôme (1) adj. _frequent_, ÆL 31^1019; (2) adv. _often, frequently_. oft
(and) +l. _constantly, diligently_.

+lômed = +lêomod

lômelic = lômlic

±lôml¯æcan _to frequent_, Æ: _be frequent_.

+lôml¯æcende _frequent_, Æ: _frequentative_ (vb), #ÆGr# 213^7.

+lôml¯æcing f. _frequency, frequenting_, #ÆGr# 213^7.

+lômlic _repeated_, AO, CP. adv. -lîce _frequently_.

+lômlîcian _to become frequent_, #Bl# 109^2.

+lômlicnes f. _frequented place_? _frequency_? #CPs# 117^27.

lomp pret. 3 sg. of limpan.

lond == land

londâdl f. _strangury_? #Lcd# 108a. [hland]

lone = lane

long == lang

Longbeard-an, -as sbmpl. _Lombards_, AO.

lonn = lann

lonu = lanu

loppe f. _flea_ (_spider_? _silkworm_?), _Bo, WW_. ['_lop_']

loppestre f. '_lobster_,' _WW_; Æ: _locust_.

lopust, lopystre = loppestre

lor n. (only in phr. tô lore, tô lose) _loss, destruction_, _Bl_; CP.
['_lor_']

-lora v. hlêow-l.

loren pp. (str.) of lêoran.

lorg, lorh fm. _pole, distaff, weaver's beam_, #Gl#.

los = lor ['_loss_']

losewist = loswist  [[under "losing"]]

losian (u) wv. (±) _to be lost, perish_, _Bo, CP_; Æ: (±) _escape, get
away_: '_lose_,' _LkL_ 15^4: _destroy_, _LkL_ 7^27.

losigendlic _ready to perish_, Æ.

losing, loswist f. _perdition, loss, destruction_, NG.

lot n. _fraud, guile_, ÆL, CP.

loten pp. of lûtan.

lotwrenc m. _deception, deceit, cunning, artifice, trick_, Æ, AO, CP.

loða m. _upper garment, mantle, cloak_, CP.

lox m. _lynx_, BH, WW. [_Ger._ luchs]

luba-, lube- = lufe-

lûcan^2 I. (±) (tr.) _to lock, close, enclose, fasten, shut up_, _An_:
(intr.) _close up, form one mass_, _Ph_: _interlock, intertwine, twist,
wind_, CP: _conclude_. ['_louk_'] II. _pluck out, pull up_, _Met_.
['_louk_'^2]

ludgæt n. _side-gate, postern gate_, #Gl#.

ludon pret. pl. of lêodan.

lufelic = luflic

lufen f. _hope_? (BT; GK), #Da# 73, B 2886.

lufestice f. _'lovage' (plant)_, _Lcd_. [_L._ levisticum]

lufestre f. _female lover_, OEG.

luffendlic = lufiendlic

±lufian _to 'love,' cherish, show love to_, _Æ, JnL, VPs_; CP: _fondle,
caress_: _approve, practise_.

lufiend m. _lover_, Æ.

lufiende _affectionate_, _ÆGr_. ['_loving_']

lufiendlic, lufigendlic _lovely, beautiful_, Æ: _lovable, amiable_, Æ.

luflic _amiable, loving_, _Lcd_: _lovable_, _Ps_. adv. -lîce _lovingly,
kindly_, _CP_: _willingly, gladly_, _BH_. ['_lovely_']

lufr¯æden f. _love_, _LPs_. ['_lovered_']

lufsum _loving, lovable, pleasant_, _Cr_. ['_lovesome_'] adv. -lîce
_graciously_.

lufsumnes f. _pleasantness, kindness_, #Gl#.

luftâcen n. '_love-token_,' _B_ 1863.

luf-týme (Æ), -tême (RB) _pleasant, sweet, grateful, benevolent_.

luftýmlic _embracing_, OEG 56^254.

lufu f. _love, strong liking, affection, favour_, _Æ, BH, Jn, VPs, WW_;
AO, CP: _love (of God)_, _JnR_: _amicable settlement_, _LL_ 392´.

lufwende _lovable, pleasant_.

lufwendlic _friendly_, #KGl# 73^34. adv. -lîce _gently_, #KGl# 80^21.

lugon pret. pl. of lêogan.

luh n. _loch, pond_, NG; Mdf. [_Keltic_]

+lumpenlic _occasional_. [limpan]

lumpon pret. pl. of limpan.

luncian _to limp_? #LPs# 17^46. [cp. _Norw._ lunke?]

lundlaga m. _kidney_, Æ.

lungen f. '_lung_,' _Lcd, WW_.

lungenâdl f. _lung-disease_, #Lcd#.

lungensealf f. _lung-salve_, #Lcd# 141a.

lungenwyrt f. '_lung-wort_,' _Lcd_.

-lunger v. cêas-l.

lungre ¶ adv. _soon, forthwith, suddenly, quickly_.

lunnon pret. pl. of linnan.

lûpe f. _loop, leash_, #Gl#.

lûs f. nap. lýs '_louse_,' _Æ, Cp, Hex_.

lusian (GPH) = losian

lust I. m. _desire, appetite_, _Æ, BH, JnL_: _pleasure_, _Bo, Lk_ (pl.):
_sensuous appetite, lust_, _Jul, Lcd, WW_. II. adj. _willing_, W 246^10.

lustb¯ære _desirable, pleasant, agreeable, cheerful, joyous_, Æ, AO:
_desirous_, ÆL 4^116.

lustb¯ærlic _pleasant_, AO. adv. -lîce.

lustb¯ærnes f. _enjoyment, pleasure, desire_, CP.

lustful _wishful, desirous_, _AO_ 100^27. ['_lustfull_']

±lustfullian _to rejoice, enjoy_, Æ: _be pleasing to_, CP 70^24.

±lustfullîce _joyfully, gladly, heartily_, _Bl_. ['_lustfully_']

±lustfullung f. _desire, pleasure_, Æ.

±lustfulnes f. _desire, pleasure_, _BH_; CP. ['_lustfulness_']

lustgeornnes f. _concupiscence_, G.

lustgryn f. _snare of pleasure_, #Soul# 23.

lustlîce _willingly, gladly_, _Bl_; Æ, AO.

lustmoce f. _lady's-smock (plant)_, #Lcd#.

lustsumlic _pleasant_. adv. -lîce _willingly_.

lustum adv. _with pleasure, gladly_.

lûsðorn m. _spindle-tree_, EC 445^31.

±lûtan^2 _to bend, stoop, decline_, Æ, AO: +loten dæg _after part of
day_: _bow, make obeisance, fall down_, _Bl, VPs_: (+) _lay down_, MtL
8^20: _entreat_. ['_lout_']

±lûtian _to lie hid, hide, lurk_, _Æ, VHy_; AO, CP. ['_lout_'^2]

lutter = hluttor  [[under "hlûtor"]]

luttor = hlûtor

lûðer- = lýðer-

lybb n. _drug_, _poison, charm_: _witchcraft_.

lybban = libban

lybbestre f. _sorceress_, WW 200^25.

lybcorn n. _a medicinal seed, wild saffron_? #Gl#.

lybcræft m. _skill in the use of drugs, magic, witchcraft_, #Bl#.

lybesn = lyfesn

lyblâc nm. _occult art, use of drugs for magic, witchcraft_.

lybl¯æca m. _wizard, sorcerer_, #Gl#.

lybsin, lybsn = lyfesn

lýc- = l¯æc-, lîc-

lycce = lyge II.

lýcð pres. 3 sg. of lûcan.

lýden (LWS) = l¯æden

lýf = lîf

lýf- = lêaf-, lêf-, lîef-, lîf-

lyfde, lyfede pret. 3 sg. of libban.

lyfesn (i) f. _charm, amulet, knot_.

lyffetere m. _flatterer_, Æ.

lyffet-tan, -tian _to flatter_, Æ.

lyffetung f. _adulation, flattery_, Æ.

lyfian = lifian, libban

lyft fmn. _air, sky, clouds, atmosphere_, _B, Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP. on lyfte
_on high, aloft_. ['_lift_'; _Ger._ luft]

lyftâdl f. _paralysis, palsy_, BH, #Lcd#.

lyftedor m. _clouds_, #Ex# 251.

lyften _of the air, aërial_, Æ.

lyftfæt n. _vessel in the air (moon)_, #Rd# 30^3.

lyftflêogend m. _flier in the air, bird_, #Sol# 289.

lyftfloga m. _flier in the air, dragon_, B 2315.

lyftgelâc ¶ n. _flight through the air_.

lyftgeswenced _driven by the wind_, B 1913.

lyfthelm ¶ m. _air, mist, cloud_.

lyftlâcende ¶ _sporting in the air, flying_.

lyftlic _aërial_, NC 314.

lyftsceaða m. _aërial robber (raven)_, #Wy# 39.

lyftwundor n. _aërial wonder_, #Ex# 90.

lyftwynn ¶ f. _pleasure in flying_.

lyge I. (i) m. _'lie,' falsehood_, _BH, Sat_. II. _lying, false_ (A; =
*lygge, JAW 25). III. _'sicalia,' secale_? _corn_? _rye_? WW 301^2.

lygen (i) f. _lie, falsehood_.

lygenian = lygnian

lygesearu ¶ n. _lying wile, trick_.

lygespell (i) n. _falsehood_, WW 449^2.

lygesynnig (i) _lying, false_, #El# 899.

lygetorn (i) _feigned anger or grief_, B 1943.

lygeword (i) ¶ n. _lying word, lie_.

lygewyrhta (i) m. _liar_, #Leas#.

lygnes (i) f. _falseness_: _false things_.

±lygnian (i) _to give one the lie, convict of falsehood_, Æ.

+lygnod _perjured_, Æ (i).

  [[Printed inline, as continuation of "lygnian" entry.]]

lýht- = lîht-

lyhð pres. 3 sg. of lêan.

lýhð pres. 3 sg. of lêogan.

lym = lim

lýman = lêoman

lymp- = limp-

±lynd (i) f. _fat, grease_.

+lyndu np. _joints of the spine_, WW 159^22.

lynibor n. _borer, gimlet_, WW 273^13.

lynis m. _axle, axletree, 'linch'-pin_, _Ep, WW_.

lypenwyrhta m. _tanner_? v. JGPh 5·467.

lyre (e) m. _loss, destruction, damage, hurt_, _WW_; Æ. ['_lure_';
lêosan]

lyrewrenc m. _hurtful intrigue_, MFH 169.

-lyrtan v. be-l.

lýs v. lûs.

lýs- = lîes-

lysferht = leasferhð  [[headword spelled "lêasferhð"]]

lysnan = hlysnan

lysnere = hlysnere

lýssa (#KGl#) = l¯æssa

lyssen = lyswen

±lystan impers. w. a. (d.) of pers. and g. of thing or inf. _to please,
cause pleasure or desire, provoke longing_, _Æ, Bl, Bo_; AO, CP. +lysted
_desirous of_. ['_list_'; lust]

lystere (OEG 4674) = ? lyftere, lyffetere

+lystfullîce = lustfullîce

lysu I. _base, false, evil_. II. n. _evil deed_.

lyswen I. _purulent, corrupt_, #Lcd#. II. n. _pus, matter_, #Lcd#.

lýt adv., adj. and indecl. sb. _little, few_, _B, DD, Gen, Run_; Æ, AO.

lýtan = lûtan

lyteg == lytig

lýtel I. adj. _'little,' not large_, _Æ, AO, Lk, Met_: _short (distance,
time)_, _B_: _not much_, _Mt, Ps_. II. adv. _little, slightly_, _Ps_.
III. sb. _AO, Lcd, Ps_.

lýtelhýdig _pusillanimous_, #Cra# 10.

lytelic = lytiglic

lytelîce = lytiglîce

lýtelmôd _pusillanimous_, CP.

lýtelne = lýtesne  [[under "lýtesnâ"]]

lýtelnes f. _smallness_, _ÆGr_ 228^14. ['_littleness_']

lýtesnâ, lýtes(t)ne adv. _nearly, within a little, almost_.

lýthwôn adv. and sb. (w. g.) _little, but little, very few_, Æ, CP.

lytig (e) _crafty, cunning_, AO.

lytigian _to feign, act crookedly_, #Ma# 86.

lytiglic (lytelic) _deceitful, crafty_. adv. -lîce, CP.

lytignes f. _cunning_, CP.

±lýtlian _to lessen, decrease, diminish_, _Bo, JnL_; CP: _shorten,
curtail, abrogate_: _fall out of use_, LL 267[37]. ['_little_']

lýtling m. _little one, infant, child_, Æ, CP.

lýtlum adv. (d. of lýtel) _little by little, gradually_, _Æ_; CP.
['_litlum_']

+lýtlung (î) f. _insufficiency, want_, #Sc# 57^1 (cp. EHy 5^12).

lyttl- = lýtl-

lyttuccas mpl. _particles, small pieces_, GPH 400.

lyð = lið

lýða = lîða

+lyðen = +liðen

lýðerful _evil, vile_, W 40^5.

lýðerlic _bad, sordid, mean, vile_, AO. adv. -lîce (û^1).

lýðernes (û^1) f. _wickedness_, HL 18^8.

lýðran (ê) _to anoint, smear, 'lather,'_ _JnL_ (e), _Lcd_. [lêaðor]

lyðre = liðere

lýðre I. (ê, î) adj. _bad, wicked, base, mean, corrupt, wretched_, _Æ,
AO, Lk, WW_. ['_lither_'] adv. _wretchedly, badly_, #Sat# 62. II. comp.
of lîðe.

lýðwyrt = lîðwyrt

lýxan = lîxan




=M=


mâ I. adv. [comp. of micle] _more, rather, longer, hereafter, further_,
_Æ, BH, Bo, Bl, CP, VPs_ (m¯æ). ðe mâ ðe _more than_. II. sb. (indecl.)
_more_, _Æ, An, BH, Bl_. III. adj. _more_, _Æ, Bl_. ['_mo_']

mabuldor = mapulder

maca = +mæcca

macalic _convenient_, MkR 6^21.

macian _to 'make,' form, construct, do_, _A, Æ_: _prepare, arrange,
cause_, _Æ, Gen, Mt_: _use_, _Æ_: _behave, fare_, _Æ, Bo_; CP. macian ûp
_to put up_, Æ.

mâcræftig (= mægencr-) ¶ _mighty_.

macung f. _making, doing_, #Chr# 1101.

+mâd = +m¯æd

mâdm == mâðm

mâdmôd n. _foolishness_, #Mod# 25.

m¯æ = mâ

±mæc _well-suited, companionable_: _similar, equal_.

mæcan = mecgan, mengan

+mæcca (a, e) mf. _mate, equal, one of a pair, comrade, companion_,
_ÆGr_ (a), _MtR_ (e): (±) _husband, wife_, _Æ, Mt, OET_. ['_match_']

m¯æcefisc = mêcefisc

mæcg ¶ m. _man, disciple_: _son_.

mæcga m. _man_, Wy 52.

mæcian = mecgan, mengan

+mæclic _conjugal_, #Sc#.

+mæcnes f. _cohabitation_, BH.

+mæcscipe m. _cohabitation_, #Cr# 199.

m¯æd (ê) f. ds. (EWS) mêda; nap. m¯æd(w)a, m¯ædwe _'mead_,' '_meadow,'
pasture_, _BC, OEG_; Æ, AO; Mdf.

+m¯æd, +m¯æded '_mad_,' _Rd, WW_: _foolish_, _Cp_.

mæddre f. '_madder_,' _Lcd_; Æ.

+m¯æded = +m¯æd

m¯æden (Æ, AO, CP) == mægden

m¯ædencild n. _female child, girl_, _AO_; Æ. ['_maiden-child_']

m¯ædenhêap m. _band of virgins_, DD 289.

m¯ædenlic _maidenly, virgin_, Æ.

mædere = mæddre

mæderecîð m. _sprig of madder_, #Lcd#.

+mædla m. _chatter_, #Lcd# 122b. [mæðel]

m¯ædland m. _meadow-land_, KC.

m¯ædm¯æwect (= -wett) _mowing of a meadow_, LL 448[5,2].

m¯ædr¯æden f. _mowing, tract of mown grass_, KC 6·153^10.

m¯ædsplott m. _plot of meadow-land_, KC 4·72^7.

mædwa m., m¯ædwe f. = m¯æd

m¯ædweland = m¯ædland

mæg I. pres. 3 sg. of magan. II. (#Sc# 4^19: 12^17) = mægen

+m¯æg I. m. nap. mâgas (v. LL 2·651) _male kinsman, parent, son, brother,
nephew, cousin_, _B, Ep_ (ê); Æ, AO, CP: ['_may_'] II. ¶ f. _female
relation, wife, woman, maiden_.

m¯ægbana m. _destroyer of kinsfolk_, W 242^5.

m¯ægbôt f. _compensation paid to the relatives of a murdered man_, LL.

m¯ægburg f. _family, tribe, race, people, nation_: _genealogy_.

m¯ægcild n. _young kinsman_.

m¯ægcnafa m. _youthful kinsman_, BC 2·329´.

m¯ægcûð _related_, OEG.

m¯ægcwalm m. _murder of a relation_, Cp 179#p# (ê).

mægden (¯æd) n. _maiden, virgin_, _LL_; Æ: _girl_, _Mt_: _maid, servant_,
_Bl_.

mægden- see also m¯æden-.

mægden¯æw f. _marriage with a virgin_.

mægdenhâd m. _'maidenhood,' virginity_, _Cr_; CP.

mægdenmann m. _'maid,' virgin_, _AO_. ['_maidenman_']

m¯æge = mâge

mægen I. (e) n. _bodily strength, might_, _'main' force, power, vigour,
valour_, _B_; Æ, CP: _virtue, efficacy, efficiency_, _Lcd_: _picked men
of a nation, troop, army_, AO: _miracle_. [magan] II. subj. pl. of
magan.

mægenâgende _mighty_, B 2837.

mægenbyrðen ¶ f. _huge burden_.

mægencorðor n. _strong troop_, #Gen# 1986.

mægencræft ¶ m. _main force, great strength, might_.

mægencyning ¶ m. _mighty king_.

mægend¯æd f. _mighty deed_, #Cra# 12.

mægenêaca m. _succour_, #Az# 138.

mægenêacen ¶ _mighty, vigorous_.

mægenearfeðe ¶ n. _great misery or trial_.

mægenellen n. _mighty valour_, B 659.

mægenfæst _vigorous, strong, steadfast_, Æ.

mægenfolc n. _mighty company_, #Cr# 877.

mægenfultum m. _mighty help_, B 1455.

mægenhêap ¶ m. _powerful band_.

mægenheard _very strong_, #Run# 5.

mægenian (gn-) _to gain strength_: (+) _establish, confirm_, BH 306^18.

mægenlêas _powerless, feeble, helpless_, _WW_; Æ. ['_mainless_'] adv.
-lîce.

mægenlêast f. _weakness, feebleness_, Æ: _inability_, RB.

mægenr¯æs m. _mighty onslaught_, B 1519.

mægenrôf ¶ _powerful_.

mægenscype m. _might, power_, #Da# 20.

mægenspêd f. _power, virtue_.

mægenstân m. _huge stone_, #Met# 5^16.

mægenstrang ¶ _of great virtue or strength_.

mægen-strengo, -strengðu f. _main strength, great might_.

mægenðegen m. _mighty minister_, #Gu# 1099.

mægenðise f. _violence, force_, #Rd# 28^10.

mægenðrêat ¶ m. _mighty host_.

mægenðrymm m. _power, might, greatness, glory_, Æ, CP: _heavenly host_:
(¶) _Christ_: (¶) _heaven_.

mægenðrymnes f. _great glory, majesty_, Æ.

mægenweorc ¶ n. _mighty work_.

mægenwîsa m. _general_, #Ex# 553.

mægenwudu m. _strong spear_, B 236.

mægenwundor n. _striking wonder_, #Cr# 927.

mæger _meagre, lean_, #Lcd# 90b.

mægerian _to macerate, make lean_, WW. [_Ger._ magern]

mægester = magister

mægeð = mægð

m¯ægeð = m¯ægð

m¯æggemôt n. _meeting of kinsmen_, AO 248^18.

m¯æggewrit n. _genealogy, pedigree_.

m¯æggieldan^3? _to contribute towards the fine for manslaughter by a
kinsman_, LL 122[74,2].

m¯ægh¯æmed n. _incest_, BH 280^1.

m¯æghand (mêg-, mêi-) f. _natural heir, relative_.

mægister = magister

m¯æglagu f. _law as to relatives_, LL 266[25].

m¯æglêas _without relatives_, LL.

m¯æglic _belonging to a kinsman_, Æ.

m¯æglufu f. _love_, #Jul# 70.

m¯ægmorðor n. _murder of a relative_, #Gl#.

m¯ægmyrðra m. _murderer of a relative, parricide_, OEG, GD 239^4.

mægn == mægen

mægnan = mengan

mægon = magon pres. pl. of magan.

m¯ægracu f. _generation, genealogy_, Æ.

m¯ægr¯æden f. _relationship_, AO.

m¯ægr¯æs m. _attack on relatives_, W 164^4.

m¯ægscîr [mêg-] f. _division of a people containing the kinsmen of a
particular family_ (BT), DR 193^10.

m¯ægsibb f. _relationship_: _affection of relatives_.

m¯ægsibbung f. _reconciliation, peace-making_, JGPh 1·63.

m¯ægsiblic _related_, WW 375^17.

m¯ægslaga m. _slayer of a relative, parricide, fratricide_, Æ.

m¯ægsliht m. _murder of a relative_, W 130^2.

mægster = magister

mægð ¶ I. f. gp. mægða, dp. mægðum, otherwise uninflected _maiden,
virgin, girl, woman, wife_. [_Goth._ magaðs] II. (±) f. _power,
greatness_.

m¯ægð (ý) f. _family group, clan, tribe, generation, stock, race,
people_, Æ, AO: _province, country_, Æ.

mægða m. _mayweed_.

mægðblæd (geð) n. _pudendum muliebre_, GPH 400^8.

mægðbôt f. _fine for assault on an unmarried woman_? LL 7[74].

mægðe f. _mayweed_. [cp. mægða]

mægðhâd m. _virginity, chastity, purity_, _MH_; Æ, CP: _band of young
persons_. ['_maidhood_']

m¯ægðhâd m. _relationship_, Æ.

mægðhâdlic _maidenly_, OEG 1469.

mægðlagu = mæglagu  [[headword spelled "m¯æglagu"]]

m¯ægðlêas _not of noble birth_, WW 219^8.

mægðmann m. _maiden, virgin_, LL 8[82].

m¯ægðmorðor (ê^1) nm. _murder of kin_, OEG 2^412.

m¯ægðmyrðra m. _murderer of kin_, OEG 2^335.

m¯ægðr¯æden f. _friendship_, OEG.

m¯ægðsibb (y^2) f. _kindred_, #HGl# 523.

m¯ægwine ¶ m. _friendly relative, clansman_.

m¯ægwlite (â, ê) m. _aspect, appearance, species, form_.

m¯ægwlitian [mêg-] _to fashion_, MtL 17^2.

m¯ægwlitlice [mêg-] _figuratively_, MkL p4^10.

mæht == meaht, miht

mæhð = mægð

m¯æl I. (â, ê) n. _mark, sign, ornament_: _cross, crucifix_: _armour,
harness, sword_: _measure_, _Lcd_: (¶) _time, point of time, occasion,
season_: _time for eating_, _'meal,' meals_, _CP_; Æ. II. f. (¶) _talk,
conversation_: _contest, battle_. [mæðel] III. = mâl

+m¯æl _stained, dyed_, #An# 1333.

+m¯ælan _to mark, stain_, #Jul# 591.

±m¯ælan ¶ _to speak, talk_, _Gen_. ['_i-mele_'; mæðlan]

m¯ælcearu f. _trouble of the time_, B 189.

mæld- = meld-

m¯ældæg ¶ m. _appointed time, day_.

m¯ældropa m. _phlegm, saliva_, WW 240^9.

m¯ældropiende _phlegmatic_, WW 161^33.

m¯æle m. _cup, bowl, bucket_, _Ep_; #Lcd# (ê). ['_meal_']

m¯ælgesceaft f. _fate_, B 2737.

m¯ælsceafa (æ?) m. _canker, caterpillar_, _WW_. ['_malshave_']

mæltan (#VPs#) = meltan

m¯æl-tang m., -tange f. _pair of compasses_, WW.

m¯æl-tîd f., tîma m. _mealtime_, NC 348.

mæn = menn nap. of man.

mæn- = man-, men-

±m¯ænan (ê) _to 'mean,' signify, intend_, _Æ, Bo, Sol_; CP: _mention,
relate, declare, communicate to, speak of_, _B_: _associate (something)
with_, AO: _complain of, lament, bewail, sorrow, grieve_, _Bo_; Æ,
AO, CP.

m¯æne I. (±, usu. +) _common, general, universal_, _Mt, WW_; Æ, AO, CP.
['_i-mene_'] II. (+) n. _fellowship, intercourse_. III. _false, mean,
wicked_. [mân] IV. (+) _subdued, overpowered_. [= *+mægne, ES 43·308]

±m¯ænelic (usu. +) _common, mutual, general, universal_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

+m¯ænelicnes f. '_generalitas_,' OEG.

mænibr¯æde _relating to many things_, WW 115^8.

m¯ænlic = m¯ænelic

+m¯ænnes f. _community, fellowship, intercourse, union_, _Shr_: _land
held in common_, BC 1·597´. [v. '_i-mene_']

+m¯ænscipe m. _community, fellowship_: _union_, W 248^23.

±m¯ænsumian _to participate in, have fellowship with_: _live with,
marry_: _partake of Eucharist_, Æ.

±m¯ænsum-nes, -ung f. _fellowship, participation_, Æ.

mænu = menigu

m¯ærâc f. _boundary-oak_, KC 3·379^29.

m¯æran (â) I. (±) _to declare, proclaim, celebrate, glorify, honour_. II.
(+) _to determine, fix limits_, #Wid# 42.

m¯ærapeldre f. _apple-tree forming part of a boundary_, KC 3·390^5.

m¯ærbrôc m. _boundary-brook_, KC.

mærc (1) == mearc; (2) = mearg

m¯ærcnoll m. _boundary-knoll_, EC 445.

m¯ærdîc f. _boundary-dyke_, KC.

mære = (1) mare; (2) mere I.

m¯ære I. (ê) _famous, great, excellent, sublime, splendid_, Æ, AO, CP.
[cp. _Ger._ märe, märchen] II. _pure, sterling (of money)_. [v. '_mere_'
adj.] III. (±, usu. +) _boundary, border_, _Mk, VPs_; Mdf.
['_mere_' sb.]

m¯ærelsrâp m. _ship's rope, cable_, WW.

mæretorht = meretorht

mærgen = morgen

mærh (_Cp, Ep_) = mearg

mærh- = mearh-

  [[Printed on one line:
  mærh (_Cp, Ep_), mærh- = mearg, mearh-]]

m¯ær-hege, -haga, -hege m. _boundary-hedge_, EC 447.

m¯ærhlîsa m. _notoriety_, WW 382^10.

m¯ærian _to be distinguished_, DHy.

mæringcwudu n. _mastic of sweet basil_? #Lcd# 131a.

+m¯ærlacu f. _boundary stream_, EC 387.

m¯ærlic (ý) _great, splendid, glorious, famous_, Æ, AO, CP. adv.
-lîce, Æ.

m¯ærnes f. _greatness, honour, fame_.

m¯ærpul m. _boundary-pool_, EC 445.

m¯ærpytt m. _pit that forms part of a boundary_ (BT), KC.

mærsc = mersc

m¯ærsere (ê) m. _herald_, DR 56^17.

±m¯ærsian (ê) I. _to make famous, celebrate, proclaim, declare,
announce_, Æ, CP: _celebrate_: _glorify, honour, exalt, praise_, Æ:
_spread (of fame)_: _enlarge_. II. _to mark out, bound, limit_.

m¯ærstân m. _boundary stone_, _BC_. ['_mere-stone_']

m¯ærsung (ê) f. _fame, report, renown_: _celebration, festival_, Æ:
_exalting, magnifying_: (±) _magnificence, celebrity_.

m¯ærsungtîma m. _time of glorifying_, ÆH 2·360^25.

mærð = mearð

m¯ærð f. _glory, repute, fame_: _famous exploit, glorious achievement_,
Æ, AO, CP.

m¯ærðorn m. _boundary-hawthorn_, KC.

m¯ærðu = m¯ærð

m¯ærðum (instr. of m¯ærð) adv. _gloriously_.

mæru = mearu

+m¯ærung? '_consummatio_,' RHy 5^10.

mærw- = mearu-

±m¯ærweg m. _boundary road_, Ct.

m¯ærweorc m. _noble work_, #PPs# 110^4.

m¯ærwyll m. _boundary stream_.

mæscre (¯æ?) f. _mesh_, WW 450^10.

mæsen _brazen_ (Earle); _of maple_ (BT), EC 250.

mæslere m. _sacristan_, GD.

mæsling, mæslen (_MkL_) = mæstling

mæssanhacele = mæssehacele

mæsse (e) f. '_mass_,' _Eucharist, celebration of Eucharist_, _Æ, BH,
OET_; CP: _special mass day, festival of the church_. [_L._ missa]

mæsse¯æfen m. _eve of a festival_.

mæsse-bôc f. nap. -bêc _'mass-book,' missal_, _LL_.

mæssecrêda m. _creed said at mass, Nicene creed_.

mæssedæg m. _'mass-day,' festival_, _Bl_.

mæssegierela m. _mass-vestment, surplice_, CP 87^19.

mæssehacele f. _mass-vestment, cope, chasuble_, LV 40, WW 327^22.

mæssehrægl n. _vestment, surplice_, CP.

mæsselâc n. _mass-offering, host_, WW.

mæsseniht f. _eve of a festival_.

mæsseprêost m. _'mass-priest,' clergyman, high priest_, _Æ, AO_; CP.

mæsseprêosthâd m. _office or orders of a mass-priest_, BH.

mæsseprêostscîr f. _district for which a mass priest officiated_, LL.

mæsserbana m. _murderer of a priest_, W 165^28.

mæssere m. _priest who celebrates mass_, _Az_. ['_masser_']

mæsserêaf n. _mass-vestment_, Æ.

mæssesang m. _office of mass_.

mæssesteall m? _seat in a church choir_, v. NC 307^348.

mæssetîd f. _time of saying mass_, LL (140^20).

mæsseðegn m. _mass-priest_, LL 460[5].

mæsseðênung f. _service of the mass, celebration of mass_, A 11·8.

mæsse-ûhta? m. or -ûhte? n. _hour, or service, of matins on a
feast-day_, NC 307.

mæssewîn (e) n. _wine used at mass_, WW.

mæssian (±) _to celebrate 'mass,'_ _Æ_: (+) _attend mass_.

mæst I. m. (_ship's_) _'mast_,' _B_; Æ, AO. II. m. '_mast,' food of
swine, acorns, beechnuts_, _BC_.

m¯æst (â, ê) I. adj. (superl. of micel), _AO, Chr, Bo, Mt_. ['_most_']
II. adv. _mostly, for the most part, in the greatest degree, chiefly,
especially_. eal m., m. eal _almost, nearly_. m. ¯ælc _nearly every one_,
Æ, AO, CP. III. n. _most_.

±mæstan _to feed with mast, fatten_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._ mästen]

mæstcyst f. _mast-socket_, WW.

mæstelberg m. _fattened hog_, MtL 6^7. [bearg]

mæsten m. _mast, pasture for swine_.

mæstenr¯æden f. _right of feeding swine in mast-pastures_, KC 3·451^10.

mæstentrêow n. _tree yielding mast_, WW 137^23.

mæstland f. _land on which there is mast_, TC 140^2.

m¯æstlicost adv. (superl.) _particularly_, CM 1169.

mæstling I. n. _brass_, _WW_: _brazen vessel_, _Mk_. ['_maslin_'; _Ger._
messing] II. _fatling_, OEG 61^29.

mæstlingsmið m. _brass-worker_, WW 539^6.

mæstlôn sbpl. _pulleys at the lop of a mast_, WW 199^30.

mæstr¯æden = mæstenr¯æden

mæstrâp m. _mast-rope_, #Ex# 82.

mæsttwist m. _rope which supports a mast_, WW.

mæt I. pret. 3 sg. of metan. II. = mete m.

±m¯ætan _to dream_ (impers.), _Æ_; (trans.) _Lcd_. ['_mete_']

mæte == mete

m¯æte (ê) _mean, moderate, poor, inferior, small, bad_. [metan]

+m¯æte _suitable as to size_, _RB_; ÆL. ['_meet_']

mætfæst- = metfæst-

+m¯ætgan ¶ _to lessen, limit_.

+mætgian (ÆL) = +metgian

m¯æting f. _dream_, _Lcd_. ['_meting_']

m¯æton pret. pl. of metan.

m¯æð I. f. _measure, degree, proportion, rate_, _Æ_; AO: _honour,
respect, reverence_, _LL_: _what is meet, right, fitness, ability,
virtue, goodness_, Æ, CP: _condition, lot, state, rank_, Æ. ['_methe_']
II. n. _cutting of grass_, _BC_. ['_math_']

m¯æð- = m¯ægð-

±m¯æðegian _to honour, respect, spare_, _W_; Æ. ['_methe_']

mæðel (e) n. _council, meeting, popular assembly_: (¶) _speech,
interview_.

mæðelcwide ¶ (e) m. _discourse_.

mæðelern ¶ n. _council-house, prætorium_.

mæðelfrið (ðl) mn. _security ('frið') enjoyed by public assemblies_,
LL 3 [1], (v. 2·464).

mæðel-hêgende ¶, -hergende _holding conclave, deliberating_.

mæðelstede ¶ (e) m. _place of assembly_: _battlefield_.

mæðelword (e) ¶ n. _address, speech_.

m¯æðere = m¯æðre

m¯æðful _humane_, _ÆGr_. ['_metheful_']

m¯æðian = m¯æðegian

mæðl = mæðel

mæðlan (_Cr_) = maðelian

m¯æðlêas _immoderate, rapacious_, _Æ_. ['_metheless_']

m¯æðlic _moderate, proportioned, befitting_, _ÆGr, TC_. adv. -lîce
_humanely, courteously_. ['_methely_']

m¯æðmêd f. _pay for haymaking_, LL 452´.

m¯æðre m. _mower_, WW.

±m¯æðrian _to honour_, LL.

m¯æðung f. _measure, extent_, NC 307.

m¯æw (ea, e) m. _'mew,' sea-gull_, _Cp, Shr_ (e).

m¯æwpul (â) m. _sea-gulls' pool_, Ct.

mâfealdra comp. of manigfeald.

maffian _to go astray_. maffiende _waxing, wanton_, NC 307.

mag- = mæg-

maga I. m. _'maw,' stomach_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_; Æ, CP. II. _powerful,
strong_.

mâga I. ¶ m. _son, descendant, young man, man_. II. gp. of m¯æg.

magan swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. mæg; 2, meaht, miht; pl. magon; pret. 3 sg.
meahte _to be able, have permission or power (I '_may_,' I can), to be
strong, competent, avail, prevail_, _Æ, B, Bo, G_, _etc._; CP. mæg wið
_avails against, cures_, #Lcd#.

mâgas v. m¯æg.

magaðe = mageðe

magdalatrêow n. _almond-tree_, WW 139^11. [_L._ amygdala]

mage f. (_WW_ 159^14) = maga

mâge (¯æ) f. _female relative_, _B_; Æ. ['_mowe_']

mâgeêct ptc. _augmented_, WW. [îecan]

mageðe (æ^1, o^2) f. _camomile, mayweed_, _Lcd, WW_. ['_maythe_']

magian _to prevail_, #ERPs# 12^5; NC 348.

magister (æ) m. _leader, chief, master, teacher_, _Æ, Bo_; AO, CP. [_L._
magister]

magisterdôm (mægster-) m. _office of a master or teacher_, #Sc# 120^9.
['_masterdom_']

+mâglic = +mâlic

+magnian _to be restored to health_, GD 338^30.

mago ¶ (magu) m. gs. maga, nap. mæcgas _male kinsman, son, descendant,
man_: _young man, servant_: _man, warrior_.

magodryht f. _band of warriors_, B 67.

magogeoguð f. _youth_, #Cr# 1429.

magor¯ædend m. _counsellor of men_, #An# 1463.

magor¯æswa ¶ m. _chief, prince_.

magorinc ¶ m. _youth, man, warrior_.

magotimber ¶ n. _child, son_: _increase of family, progeny_.

magotûdor ¶ n. _descendant, offspring_.

magoðe, magðe = mageðe

magoðegn ¶ m. _vassal, retainer, warrior, man, servant, minister_.

magu = mago

mâgwlite = m¯ægwlite

±mâh _bad, wanton, shameless, importunate_.

mahan = magon pres. pl. of magan.

+mâhlic == +mâlic

+mâhnes f. _importunity, persistence_: _shamelessness_.

maht (#VPs#) = miht

mâl I. n. _suit, cause, case, action, terms, agreement, covenanted pay_,
_Chr_. hê scylode ix scypa of mâle _he paid nine ships out of
commission_, #Chr# 1049#c#. ['_mail_'] II. n. _spot, mark, blemish_, Æ.
III. = m¯æl n.

mâldæg = m¯ældæg

+mâlic _importunate_: _wanton, shameless_: _wicked_. adv. -lîce.

+mâlicnes f. _importunity_: _wantonness, shamelessness_, CP.

malscrung f. _enchantment, charm_.

mâlswyrd n. _sword with inlaid ornament_, TC 560^33. [m¯æl]

malt (_Gl_) == mealt

malwe (_WW_) = mealwe

mamme f. _teat_, _GPH_ 401^77. [_L._ mamma]

mamor, mamra m. _lethargy, heavy sleep_, #Gl#.

mâmrian _to think out, design_, #PPs# 63^5.

man I. pron. indef. _one, people, they_, _B, Mt_; Æ. ['_man_'] II. =
mann. III. pres. 3 sg. of munan.

mân I. n. _evil deed, crime, wickedness, guilt, sin_, Æ: _false oath_,
ÆP 216^14. II. adj. _bad, criminal, false_, AO. [_ON._ mein]

+man (o) _having a mane_, WW 492^20.

man- = mann-

+mâna m. _community, company_, Æ: _companionship, intercourse_, _BH_:
_cohabitation_. tô +mânan _in common_, CP. ['_mone_']

manað pres. 3 sg. of manian.

mânâð m. _false oath, perjury_, _LL_; HL. ['_manath_'; _Ger._ meineid]

mânbealu n. _crime, cruelty_, #Da# 45.

manbôt (o^1) f. _fine paid to the lord of a man slain_, _LL_ (v. 2·576).
['_manbote_']

mânbryne m. _fatal, destructive fire_, #Chr# 962#a#.

mancgere = mangere

manc-s, -cas, -cos, -cus m., gp. mancessa (CP) _a 'mancus,' thirty
silver pence, one-eighth of a pound_, _Æ, BC_.

mancwealm m. _mortality, pestilence, destruction_, _Chr_; AO.
['_manqualm_']

mancwealmnes f. _manslaughter_, NG.

mancwyld (o) f. _mortality, pestilence_, BH 190^8.

mancynn n. _mankind_, _Æ, B, Bl_: _inhabitants, people, men_, CP.
['_mankin_']

mancyst f. _human virtue_, MFH 169.

mand (o) f. _basket_, _Cp, MtL_ (o), _WW_. ['_maund_']

mând¯æd f. _sin, crime_, Æ, AO, CP.

mând¯æde _evil-doing, wicked_.

mândeorf _wicked_, LL (382^12).

mandrêam ¶ m. _revelry, festivity_.

mândrinc m. _poison_, #Rd# 24^13.

mandryhten ¶ m. _lord, master_.

maneg = manig

mânf¯æhðu f. _wickedness_, #Gen# 1378.

manfaru f. _host, troop_, #Gu# 257.

mânfeld m. _field of crime_ ('_campus sceleratus_'), AO 108^20.

mânfolm f. _evil-doer_, #PPs# 143^8.

mânford¯ædla m. _evil-doer_, B 563.

mânforwyrht ¶ n. _evil deed, sin_.

mânfrêa ¶ m. _lord of evil, Devil_.

mânfremmende ¶ _sinning, vicious_.

mânful _wicked, evil, infamous, degraded_, Æ: _fearful, dire_.

mânfullic _infamous, evil, sinful_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ.

mânfulnes f. _wickedness_, Æ.

manfultum m. _military force_, AO (o^1).

+mang I. n. _mixture, union_: _troop, crowd, multitude_: _congregation,
assembly_: _business_: _cohabitation_. in +m. _during_. on +m. _in the
midst of_. II. prep. (w. d. or a.) _among_, Æ.

mângenga m. _evil-doer_, BH 36^5.

mângenîðla m. _evil persecutor_, #An# 918.

+mangennes = +mangnes

mangere m. _trader, merchant, broker_, Æ.

mângewyrhta m. _sinner_, #PPs# 77^38.

±mangian _to trade_, Æ, CP.

+mang-nes, -ennes f. _mingling, mixture_, OEG.

mangung f. _trade, business_, Æ.

mangunghûs n. _house of merchandise_, Jn 2^16.

mânhûs n. _home of wickedness, hell_, #Ex# 535.

±manian (o) _to remind, admonish, warn, exhort, instigate_, Æ, CP:
_instruct, advise_, Æ: _claim, demand, ask_. [_Ger._ mahnen]

mânîdel ¶ _vain and bad (words)_.

maniend m. _admonisher_, CP 400^13: _collector_.

manif- = manigf-

manig (æ^1, e^1, o^1, e^1) nap. manega _'many,' many a, much_, _Æ, AO,
B, BH_; CP.

manigean = manian

manigeo = menigu

manigfeald (æ, e, o^1) _manifold, various, complicated_, Æ, CP:
_numerous, abundant_: _plural_.

±manigfealdian _to multiply, abound, increase, extend_, _OEG_ (æ^1);
CP(a^3). ['_manifold_']

manigfealdlic _manifold_. adv. -lîce _in various ways_, CP: (gram.) _in
the plural number_. ['_manifoldly_']

manigfealdnes f. _multiplicity, great number, abundance, complexity_,
_WW_. ['_manifoldness_']

manigsîðes (mani-) adv. _many times, often_, W 144^11.

manig-têaw (æ^1), -tîwe, -týwe _skilful, dexterous_, Æ.

manigtêawnes (mænitýw-) f. _skill, dexterity_, OEG.

manlêas _uninhabited_, _WW_ (o). ['_manless_']

mânlic _infamous, nefarious_, Æ.

manlîca m. _effigy, image, statue_.

manlîce adv. _manfully, nobly_, _B_. ['_manly_']

manlufu f. _love for men_, #Gu# 324.

manm- = mannm-

mann (o) m., nap. men(n) _person (male or fem.)_, _Æ, Bl, Lcd, Mt, VHy_;
AO, CP: _mankind_, _Mk, VPs_: _brave man, hero_: _vassal, servant_:
_name of the rune for =m=_.

mann-, see also man-.

manna I. m., _man_, Æ. II. n. _manna (food)_, Æ, CP. [_L._]

mannb¯ære _producing men_, ÆH 1·450.

mannêaca (mon-) m. _issue, progeny_, AO 158^20.

mannian _to 'man,' garrison_, #Chr# 1087#e#.

mannmægen (o) n. _troop, force, cohort_, JnL 18^3.

mannmenigu (o) f. _multitude_, AO.

mannmyrring f. _destruction of men_, #Chr# 1096.

manr¯æden f. _dependence, homage, service, tribute, due_, _Æ_.
['_manred_']

manrîm ¶ n. _number of men_.

mânsceatt m. _usury_, #PPs# 71^14.

mânsceaða ¶ m. _enemy, sinner_.

mânscild f. _crime, fault, sin_, ¶Hy 8^23.

manscipe m. _humanity, courtesy_, _BC_. ['_manship_']

mânscyldig ¶ _criminal, guilty_.

manslæht = manslieht

manslaga m. _man-slayer, murderer_, Æ.

mânslagu f. _cruel blow_, #An# 1218.

manslêan^6 _to kill, murder_, RB 16^18 (or ? two words).

manslege m. _manslaughter, homicide_.

manslieht (e^2, i^2) m. _manslaughter, murder_, _CP_. ['_manslaught_']

manslot _share in ownership of land_? _measure of land_? v. NC 307.
[_ON._ mannshlutr]

-mânsumian, -mânsumung v. â-m.

mansw¯æs _meek_, #RPs# 24^9.

mânswara (o^2) m. _perjurer_.

mânswaru f. _perjury_. [swerian]

mânswerian^6 _to forswear, perjure oneself_, _LL_. ['_manswear_']

mânswica m. _deceiver, traitor_ (mann-? v. LL 2·142).

mansylen (i^2) f. _traffic in men, act of selling men as slaves_.
[sellan]

manðêaw ¶ m. _habit, custom_ (? sometimes mânðêaw _sinful custom_).

manðêof m. _man-stealer_, v. LL 2·542.

manðw¯ære (o) _gentle, kind, humane, mild, meek_, ÆL, CP. [_OHG._
mandwâri]

+manðw¯ærian _to humanize_, CP 362^21.

manðw¯ærnes (o) f. _gentleness, courtesy, weakness_, ÆL (ý^2), CP.

manu f. '_mane_,' _Erf_ 1182.

manung f. _admonition_, CP: _claim_: _place of toll_: _district for
purposes of tribute or taxation_: _residents in a taxing district_.

mânwamm (o^2) m. _guilty stain_, #Cr# 1280.

mânweorc I. n. _crime, sin_. II. adj. _sinful_.

manweorod (o) m. _collection of men, troop, congregation, assembly_, AO.

manweorðung f. _adoration of human beings_, LL (248^3).

manwîse (o) ¶ f. _manner or custom of men_.

mânword n. _wicked word_, #PPs# 58^12.

mânwr¯æce _wicked_, WW 426^19.

mânwyrhta ¶ m. _evil-doer, sinner_.

manwyrð n. _value or price of a man_, LL.

mapulder (o^2) m. _maple tree_.

mapuldern _made of maple_.

mapul-dre, -dor, -dur f., -trêo m. (Mdf) = mapulder

mâra m., mâre fn. (compar. of micel) _greater_, _'more,' stronger,
mightier_, _Æ, Bl, CP_. adv. _in addition_, _Mt_.

mâran = m¯æran

mârbêam (#VPs#) = môrbêam

marc n. _a denomination of weight_ (usu. half a pound), _mark_ (money of
account).

marcian = mearcian

mare I. f. _silver weed_, #Lcd# 2·74^9. II. f. _nightmare, monster_,
_Ep_ (e), _Lcd_. ['_mare_']

mâre v. mâra.

mârels = m¯ærelsrâp

marenis = mearuwnes

margen- = morgen-

market n. _market_, TC 422^20. [_L._ mercatum]

marma m. _marble_. [_L._ marmor]

marman-stân (marmel-, marm(or)-) m. _marble, piece of marble_, _Æ, Bl_.
['_marmstan_']

marmstângedelf n. _quarrying of marble_, ÆH 1·560^32.

-marod v. â-m.

martir, martyr(e) m. '_martyr_,' _BH_; Æ, AO. [_L._]

martirlogium m. _martyrology_, IM 122^45.

martr- = martyr-

martyrdôm m. '_martyrdom_,' _BH_; Æ, CP.

martyrhâd m. _martyrdom_.

+mar-tyrian, -trian _to 'martyr,'_ _AO, BH_.

martyrracu f. _martyrology_, ÆL 23^334.

martyrung f. _passion (of Christ)_, _AO_ 254^24. ['_martyring_']

mârðu = m¯ærð

mârûfle _horehound_. [_L._ marrubium]

masc = max

mâse f. _name of a small bird_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ meise]

-masian v. â-m.

massere m. _merchant_: _moneylender_, #Bk# 10.

mâst = m¯æst

matte (_Cp_) = meatte

mattuc (æ^1, ea^1, e^1, eo^1, o^2) m. '_mattock_,' _A, AO_; Æ: _fork,
trident_.

mâð pret. 3 sg. of mîðan.

maða m. _maggot, worm, grub_, _WW_. ['_mathe_']

maðal- = maðel-

+maðel n. _speech, talking_. [m¯æl]

maðelere m. _speaker, haranguer_, _WW_. [v. '_mathele_']

maðelian ¶ (æ^1, e^1, a^2, o^2) _to harangue, make a speech, speak_,
_An_ (e), _B, Cp, Cr_ (æ). ['_mell_,' '_mathele_']

maðelig _tumultuous, turbulent_, #KGl# 75^23.

maðelung f. _garrulity, loquacity_, _OEG_. [v. '_mathele_']

mâðm = mâðum

mâðm- see also mâððum.

mâðm¯æht ¶ f. _valuable thing, treasure_.

mâðmcleofa (mâd-) m. _treasure-chamber_, Æ (9^277).

mâðmcyst f. _treasure-chest_, Mt 27^6.

mâðmgestrêon n. _treasure_, B, MFH.

mâðmhord n. _treasure-hoard_, #Ex# 368.

mâðmhûs n. _treasure-house, treasury_, AO, CP.

mâðmhyrde m. _treasurer_, #Bo# 64^13.

maðolian = maðelian

mâððum == mâðum, mâðm

maððum-fæt n., pl. -fatu _precious vessel_, Æ.

mâððumgesteald n. _treasure_, #Jul# 36.

mâððumgifu f. _gift of treasure_, B 1301.

mâððumgyfa m. _giver of treasure, prince, king_, #Wa# 92.

mâððumsele m. _hall of treasure_, #Sol# 189.

mâððumsigle n. _costly ornament_, B 2757.

mâððumsweord n. _costly sword_, B 1023.

mâððumwela m. _valuables_, B 2750.

maðu f. = maða

mâðum m., gs. mâðmes _treasure, object of value, jewel, ornament, gift_,
_Gn, Met_; CP. ['_madme_']

mâðum- = mâðm-, mâððum-

mâwan^7 _to 'mow,'_ _AO, BH_.

mâwpul = m¯æwpul

max n. _net_, _WW_. ['_mask_']

mâxwyrt f. _mash-wort (malt soaked in boiling water)_, #Lcd#.

me I. das. of pers. pron. ic _me_. II. (RB 35^9; 127^13) = menn
  [[II. form of "man"]]

meagol (e) _mighty, strong, firm, emphatic, impressive_. [magan]

meagollîce adv. _earnestly_, #Bl#.

meagolmôd _earnest, strenuous_.

meagolmôdnes f. _earnestness_, #Bl#.

meagolnes f. _earnestness, strength of will_, #Bl#, HL.

meaht I. == miht. II. pres. 2 sg. of magan.

meahte pret. 3 sg. of magan.

mealc pret. of meolcan.

mealclîðe ?= meolclîðe

mealehûs = meluhûs

mealewe = mealwe

mealm = mealmstân

mealmeht _sandy_? _chalky_? KC 3·394^13. [v. '_malm_']

mealmstân m. _soft stone, sandstone_? _limestone_? AO 212^28.
[v. '_malm_']

mealt I. n. _steeped grain, 'malt,'_ _Ct, Ep_. [meltan] II. pret. 3 sg.
of meltan.

mealtealoð m? n? _malt-ale_, ANS 84^325.

mealtgescot n. _payment in malt_, W 171^2.

mealthûs n. '_malt-house_,' _WW_.

mealtwurt f. '_malt-wort_,' _WW_. [wyrt]

mealu = melu

mealwe f. '_mallow_,' _Lcd_; Æ. [_L._ malva]

mear = mearh

mearc (æ, e) f. (±) _'mark,' sign, line of division_, _Æ, MkL_ (e):
_standard_, _ÆGr_: (±) _boundary, limit, term, border_, _BC, Gen_; CP;
Mdf. tô ðæs +mearces ðe _in the direction that_: _defined area,
district, province_, AO.

mearca m. _space marked out_.

mearcere (æ) m. _writer, notary_, OEG.

mearcgemot _court for settling boundaries of properties_? v. LL 2·143.

mearchof n. _dwelling_, #Ex# 61.

±mearcian _to 'mark,' stain, brand, seal_, _BC, LL, MtL, Ph_; Æ: _mark a
boundary, delimit, define, describe, designate_, _Æ, Gen_: _mark out,
design_, _Bo_: _create_: _note, observe_.

mearc-îsern, -îsen n. _branding-iron_.

mearcland n. _border-land, march, moor_: (¶) _province, country,
district_: _sea-coast_, #Rd# 4^23.

mearcpæð ¶ m. _road, path_.

mearcstapa ¶ m. _march-haunter_.

mearcstede m. _border-land, desolate district_, #Sol# 217.

mearcðrêat m. _army, troop_, #Ex# 173.

mearcung (æ, e) f. _marking, branding_: _mark, characteristic_: (±)
_description, arrangement_: _constellation_: _title, chapter_, NG.

mearcwadu § np. _shallows, water by the shore_.

mearcweard m. _wolf_, #Ex# 168.

meard = (1) meord, mêd; (2) mearð

  [[(1) Printed as shown: "meord" (meorð) and "mêd" are different
  words.]]

mêares v. mearh.

mearg, mearh (æ, e) nm. I. _'marrow,' pith_, _Lcd_. II. _sausage_.
[= mærg]  [[headword spelled "mærh"]]

mêargealle (e^1, e^2) m. _gentian_, #Lcd#. [mearh]

+meargian _to be rich, marrowy_, #LPs# 65^15.

mearglic _marrowy, fat_, #VPs# (e).

mearh, mearg m., gs. mêares _horse, steed_.

mearhæccel n. _sausage-meat_, WW 411^20.

mearhcofa m. _bone_, #PPs# 101^3.

mearhgehæc n. _sausage-meat_, WW 427^30.

mearmstân = marmanstân

mearn pret. 3 sg. of murnan.

+mearr I. n. _stumbling-block, obstruction, error_, CP. [_Goth._
gamarzeins] II. _wicked, fraudulent_, LL 140[1,5].

mearrian _to err_, #Bo# 55^23.

mearð (æ, e) m. _marten_, _Ep, AO_. ['_mart_']

mearu (æ, e, y), mear(u)w- in obl. cases _tender, soft_, _Lcd_: _frail_,
GD 119^17. ['_meruw_']

mearulic (merwe, mærw-) _frivolous_. adv. -lîce _delicately,
luxuriously_, GD.

mearuwnes f. _tenderness, frailty_, CP.

mêast = m¯æst

meatte (a) f. _'mat,' mattress_, _WW_. [_L._ matta]

mêaw = m¯æw

mec as. of ic pers. pron.

+mec = +mæc

mêce m. _sword, blade_. [_Goth._ mêki]

mêcefisc (¯æ) m. _mullet_, #ÆGr# 308^5.

mecg = mæcg

mecgan _to mix, stir_.

mech = me

mechanisc _mechanical_, Æ. [_L._]

mêd I. f. _'meed,' reward, pay, price, compensation, bribe_, _ÆL_
(gs. mêdes), _B, BH, Bl_; CP. II. = m¯æd

med- in comp. principally indicates mediocrity, but often comes to have
a distinct negative value; see, _e.g._, medtrum, medwîs. [midde]

mêda v. m¯æd.

-mêdan v. on-m.

medder = mêder

medder-, meddr- = mêdr-

meddrosna fp. _dregs of mead_, #Lcd# 48a.

+mêde I. n. _consent, permission, agreement, covenant_. II. _agreeable,
pleasant_.

medel = mæðel

medeme (eo) _middling, average, mean, little_: _sufficient,
considerable, respectable, proper, fit, worthy, trustworthy,
perfect_, CP.

±medemian (eo^1) _to mete out, allot, assign, place_: _moderate_:
_respect, honour_, Æ: (+) _condescend_, Æ: (+) _advance, promote_.

medemlic _moderate, mediocre_: _worthy_. adv. -lîce _moderately,
incompletely_: _suitably, worthily, kindly_.

medemlîcnes f. _mediocrity_, OEG.

medemmicel (Æ) = medmicel

medemnes f. _dignity, worth_, #Bo#: _benignity, condescension_, #Bl#.

medemung f. _measuring, measure_.

mêden = mægden

mêder ds. and LWS gs. of môdor.

mêderce = mýderce  [[headword spelled "myderce"]]

medere = mæddre

mêderen, mêdern = mêdren

mêderwyrhta = mêterwyrhta

medewyrt = meduwyrt

mêdgian _to bribe_. [mêd]

mêdgilda m. _pensioner, hireling_, Æ.

mêdl- = m¯æðl-

-mêdla v. an-, ofer-m.

medlen = midlen

medm- = medem-

medmicel I. _moderate-sized, short, small, limited, unimportant, slight,
mean, poor_. II. n. _a little_.

medmicelnes f. _smallness (of mind)_, #SPs# 54^8.

medmicle comp. medmâre, adv. _humbly, meanly, slightly_.

medo = medu

medom- = medem-

mêdren I. _maternal, of a mother_. II. n. _the mother's side
(by descent)_, LL 156[11].

+mêdren _born of the same mother_, AO 114^13.

mêdrencynn n. _mother's kindred_.

mêdrengecynd n. _mother's nature_, W 17^7.

mêdrenm¯æg m. _maternal kinsman_.

mêdrenm¯ægð f. _maternal kindred_, LL 392[3].

+mêdrian _to have the same mother_, Æ.

medrîce _of low rank_, WW 115^26.

mêdsceatt m. _payment, fee, reward, bribe, gift_, Æ, CP.

medsêlð (¯æ) f. _ill-fortune_, AO.

medspêdig _poor_, #Cra# 9.

medstrang _of middle rank_, Æ.

medtrum _weak, infirm, sickly, ill_, CP: _of lower rank_. [cp. medmicel]

medtrumnes (met-; y^2) f. _weakness, infirmity, sickness, illness,
disease_, AO, CP.

medu (eo) mn. gs. med(e)wes _'mead' (drink)_, _B, Rd_ (eo); AO.

meduærn n. _mead-hall, banqueting-house_, B 69 (o^2).

medubenc ¶ f. _bench in a mead-hall_.

meduburg ¶ f. _mead city, rejoicing city_.

medudrêam ¶ m. _mead-joy, jollity_.

medudrenc (eo^1) m. _mead_, W 245^4.

medudrinc (o^2) m. _mead-drinking_, #Seaf# 22.

meduful ¶ n. _mead-cup_.

medugâl ¶ _mead-excited, drunk_.

meduheall ¶ f. _mead-hall_.

medum- = medem-

medur¯æden (eo^1) f. _strong drink_? (BT), _dealing out of mead_? (GK),
#GnE# 88.

meduscenc (eo^1) m. _mead-cup_, B 1980.

meduseld n. _mead-hall_, B 3065.

medusetl n. (eo^1, o^2) _mead-seat_, B 5.

medustîg f. _path to the mead-hall_, B 924.

meduwêrig ¶ _overpowered with mead, drunk_.

meduwong (eo^1, o^2) m. _field (where the mead-hall stood)_. B 1643.

meduwyrt (eo^1, e^2) f. _meadow-sweet_, _Lcd_: _'rubia,' madder_, OEG
56^40 (e^2). ['_mead-wort_']

medwîs _dull, stupid, foolish_, CP. [cp. medmicel]

mêdwyrhta m. _a hireling_, #Sc# 123^12.

meg == mæg

mêg = (1) m¯æw; (2) m¯æg

mêg- = m¯æg-

megol == meagol

meh = mec, me, as. of ic.

meht == meaht, miht

mêi, mêig = m¯æg

meige (#KGl# 81^32) = mæge pres. 3 sg. subj. of magan.

meiðhâd (#KGl# 56^7) = mægðhâd

mêl = m¯æl n.

mela = melu

melc == meolc

melcingfæt = meolcfæt

meld f. _proclamation_, #Da# 648.

melda m. _reporter, informer, betrayer_, Æ.

meldan (æ) (_Rd_) = meldian

melde f. _orache (plant)_, _Lcd_. ['_milds_'; _Ger._ melde]

meldfeoh n. _informer's reward_, LL 96[17].

±meldian _to announce, declare, tell, proclaim, reveal_, _Ps_; Æ:
_inform against, accuse_. ['_meld_'; _Ger._ melden]

meldung f. _betrayal_, BH 240^4.

mêle = m¯æle

meledêaw mn. _honey dew, nectar_, _Ph, WW_ (mild-). ['_mildew_']

melewes = melwes gs. of melu.

-melle, -melnes v. ¯æ-m.

melo = melu

melsc = milisc

±meltan I. (y) (sv^3) tr. and intr. _to consume by fire_, _'melt'
become fluid, digest, dissolve, burn up_, _B, CP, El, Lcd, WW_; Æ.
II. = miltan

meltestre = myltestre

meltung f. _digestion_, #Lcd#.

melu (ea, eo) n., gs. mel(u)wes _'meal,' flour_, _Lcd_; Æ. [_Ger._ mehl]

melugescot n. _payment in meal_, W 171.

meluhûdern n. _meal-house_, LL 455[17].

meluhûs (ea^1, e^2) n. _meal-house_, WW 185^27.

meluw (LWS) = melu

men v. mann.

mênan = m¯ænan

mend- = mynd-

+mêne- = +m¯æne-

mene (y) m. _necklace, collar, ornament, jewel_. [_Ger._ mähne]

menegian = mynegian

menego = menigu

menen (i) n. _maiden, handmaid, slave_.

menescilling m. _moon-shaped ornament, coin worn as ornament_, #Gl#.

±mengan (æ) tr. and intr. _to mix, combine, unite_, _Lk, Sat_: (±)
_associate, consort, cohabit with_, _BH, Ps_: _disturb_, _B_: (¶)
_converse_. ['_meng_']

+mengedlic _mixed, confused_. adv. -lîce.

+mengednes, +meng(d)nes f. _mingling, mixture, connection_, Æ, BH.

mengeo, mengo, mengu = menigu

mengung f. _mixture, composition_, _ZDA_: _fellowship_, GD: (+)
_confusion_. ['_menging_']

meni (LWS) = manig

menian = mynian

menig (LWS) == manig

menigdu f. _band of people_, WW 448^27.

menigu (a^1, æ^1, eo^3) f. usu. indecl. in sg. _company, multitude,
host_, Æ, AO, CP. [manig]

menio, meniu (LWS) = menigu

menisc = mennisc

menn v. mann.

mennen, mennenu = menen

mennesc == mennisc

mennisc I. adj. _human, natural_, _Bo, CP_; Æ. II. n. _mankind, folk,
race, people_, _Bl_; Æ CP. ['_mannish_']

mennisclic _human_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce, Æ.

mennisc-licnes (EHy 15^35), -nes f. _state of man, human nature,
incarnation_, _BH_; Æ: _humaneness, humanity_. ['_mannishness_']

menniscu f. _humanity, human state_, CP.

mentel (æ) m., gs. mentles _mantle, cloak_, CP. [_L._ mantellum]

mentelprêon m. _mantle-pin, brooch_, Ct.

menung = (*mynung), mynegung

mêo mf? gs. and nap. mêon _shoe-sole, sock_? _sandal_? RB, WW.

meocs = meox

+meodnes f. _dignity_, DR 192´. [= medemnes]

meodo, meodu = medu

meodom- = medem-

meodoma = meoduma

meodren = mêdren

meodum- = medem-

meoduma m. _weaver's beam, treadle_? WW.

meolc I. _giving milk, milch_. II. (i, M) f. '_milk_,' _BH_; Æ, AO.

meolcan^3 (e, i) _to milk_.

meolcdêond (i; -têond) m. _suckling_, #JVPs# 8^3.

meolcfæt n. _milk-pail_, WW 123^28.

meolchwît '_milk-white_,' _GPH_.

meolcian (i) _to 'milk,'_ _Lcd, Shr_: (±) _give milk, suckle_, _Bl_.

meolclîðe (ea) _milky_, CM 49.

meolcsûcend m. _suckling_, WW.

meolo (_Bo_) = melu

meoloc (CP) = meolc

meolu = melu

meoluc = meolc

mêon v. mêo.

meord f. _reward, pay_. [_Goth._ mizdô]

meoring f. _danger_? #Ex# 62?

meorð = meord

mêos I. m. _moss_, Æ; Mdf. II. adj. _mossy_.

mêose = mêse

meotod, meotud == metod

meottoc (_Cp_) = mattuc

+meotu = +metu nap. of +met.

meotud- = metod-

meoðon (BH) = miðon pret. pl. of mîðan.

mêowle ¶ f. _maiden, virgin_: _woman_. [_Goth._ mawilô]

meox (e, i, y) n. _filth, dirt, dung_, _Æ, Bo, Lk_. ['_mix_']

meoxbearwe f. _dung-barrow_, WW 336^8.

meoxen = mixen

meoxscofl (e^1) f. _dung-shovel_, LL 455[17].

meoxwilie (cs) f. _dung-basket_, #LPs# 80^7.

mêr- = m¯ær-

mera m. _incubus_, #Gl#.

merc (A) == mearc

merce = merece

+merce = +mierce

mercels = mircels

mercong (NG) = mearcung

mere I. m. (¶) _sea, ocean_, _An_: _lake, pond, pool, cistern_, _B, Ep,
Jn_; CP; Mdf. ['_mere_'] II. = mare. III. = miere

mêre (#VPs#) = m¯ære I.

merebât m. _sea-boat, vessel_, #An# 246.

merecandel f. _sun_, #Met# 13^57.

merece m. _smallage, wild celery_, _Æ, Gl, Lcd_.

mereciest f. _sea-chest, ark_, #Gen# 1317.

meredêað ¶ m. _death at sea_.

meredêor n. _sea-animal_, B 558.

merefara m. _sailor_, B 502.

merefaroð ¶ m. _surging of the waves_.

merefix m. _sea-fish_, B 549.

mereflôd ¶ m. _sea, body of water, deluge_.

mere-grêot (Æ), -grot n., -grota m. _pearl_.

meregrund ¶ m. _lake-bottom, depths of the sea_.

merehengest ¶ m. _sea-horse, ship_.

merehrægl n. _sail_, B 1905.

merehûs ¶ n. _sea-house, the ark_.

merehwearf m. _sea-shore_, #Ex# 516.

mêrehwît _pure white, sterling (of silver)_. [m¯ære II.]

merelâd f. _sea-way_, #Hu# 27.

merelîðende m. _seafaring (man)_, _sailor_.

mere-menn, -mennen, -menin n. _mermaid, siren_, _Cp, WW_. ['_mermin_']

mere-næddra m., -næddre, -n¯ædre f. _'murena,' sea-adder, lamprey_.

meresmylte _quiet as the sea, calm_, #Met# 21^12.

meresteall m. _stagnant water_, MFH 169.

merestr¯æt ¶ f. _sea-path_.

merestrêam ¶ m. _sea-water_.

merestrengo f. _strength in swimming_, B 523.

mereswîn n. _porpoise, dolphin_, _Cp, Lcd_. ['_mereswine_']

meretorht (æ) ¶ _(rising) bright from the sea_.

meretorr m. _towering wall of the (Red) sea_, #Ex# 484.

mereðyssa ¶ m. _ship_.

mereweard m. _sea-warden_, #Whale# 53.

merewêrig _sea-weary_, #Seaf# 12.

merewîf n. _water-witch_, B 1519.

merg (_Cp_ 195#m#) = mearg

merg- = mearg-, meri-, morg-, myrg-

mer-gealle, -gelle = meargealle  [[headword spelled "mêargealle"]]

merian _to purify, cleanse_, _Sat_: _test_. ['_mere_']

merice (#Gl#) = merce

merien = morgen

merig = (1) myrge; (2) mearg

merig- = myrg-

merigen (Æ, AO) = morgen

merisc = mersc

merne = mergenne ds. of mergen.  [[under "morgen"]]

merr- = mierr-

mêrs- = m¯ærs-

mersc (æ) m. _'marsh,' swamp_, _Bl, Cp_; CP.

merschôfe m. _marsh hove_, #Lcd# 35b.

merscland n. _marsh-land_, #Chr# 1098.

merscmealwe f. '_marsh-mallow_,' _Lcd_.

merscmeargealle f. _gentiana pneumonanthe_, #Lcd#.

merscware pl. _inhabitants of marshes_. (1) _Romney marsh_, #Chr# 796.
(2) _the fens_? #Chr# 838.

mertze f. _merchandise_, WW 32^25. [_L._ mercem]

merð = mearð

merðern _made of skins of martens_.

mêrðu (N) = m¯ærð

meru (_MtR_) = mearu

meruw-, merwe- = mearu(w)-

mês (K) = mýs, v. mûs.

mesa fpl. _dung_, #Lcd# 37a.

mêsan _to eat_, #Rd# 41^52. [môs]

mêse (êo, î, ý) f. _table_: _what is placed on a table_. [_L._]

mess- = mæss-

mêsta (#KGl#) = m¯æsta superl. of micel.

±met (usu. +) _measure (vessel or amount)_, _Æ_: _act of measuring,
appointed share, quantity_, _Mt_: _space, distance_, _LL_: _boundary,
limit_, _Bo, Met_: _manner, degree, way_: _ability, capacity_: _rule,
law_: _mood_ (gram.): _metre_: _moderation_, _MtR_. ealle +mete _in all
respects_. on +m. _in vain_, #RPs# 88^48. nânum +m. _by no means, on no
account_. ['_met_,' '_i-met_']

+met _suitable, fit, proper, apt, meet_. adv. -mête.

+mêt = +môt

-mêt v. wêa-m.  [[under "wêamêt"]]

meta (#Sc# 153) = mete

metærn = meteærn

±metan^5 _to measure_, _'mete' out, mark off_, _Æ, Ex, Mt, VPs_:
_compare_, _Bo_; CP: _es imate_, _Bl_: m. wið _pass over, traverse_,
_B_.

±mêtan I. _to 'meet,' find, find out, fall in with, encounter_, _Bo,
Bl_; Æ, AO, CP. [gemôt] II. _to paint, design_, _ÆGr_. ['_mete_']
  [[I. "gemôt" listed as "+môt"]]

metbælg m. _wallet_, LkR 22^35.

mete (æ) m. nap. mettas _'meat,' food_, _BH, Lk, Sc_; Æ, AO, CP.

mête = m¯æte

meteærn n. _refectory_, GD, WW.

meteâflîung f. _atrophy_, WW.

meteclyfa m. _food-store, pantry_, OEG 56^270.

metecorn n. _allowance of corn to dependents_, _TC_. ['_metecorn_']

metecû f. _cow for killing_, LL.

metecweorra m? _surfeit, indigestion_.

+mêtednes f. _finding, discovery_, #LPs# 27^4.

metefæt [met-] n. _dish_, GPH 403.

metef¯ætels m. _cupboard for food_, _WW_ 107^5. ['_metefetill_']

meteg- = metg-

metegafol n. _payment in food_, LL 448[4,5].

metegearwa fp. _preparations of food_, #Lcd# 78b.

metegyrd = metgeard

metel¯æst = metelîest

metelâf f. _leavings of a meal_.

metelêas _without food_, Æ.

mete-lîest (AO), -lê(a)st, -lîst, -lýst f. _lack of food, starvation_.

metend m. _measurer_: _God_.

mêtenêad f. _requisites in the way of food_, LL 383´? (v. 2·145).

mêter n. '_metre_' (poet.), _A, BH_. [_L._]

meter¯ædere m. _reader at mealtimes_, NC 309.

mêtercræft m. _art of versifying_, BH 258^15.

mêtercund _relating to metre_, WW.

mêtere m. _painter_.

mêterfers n. _hexameter verse_, BH.

mêtergeweorc n. _verse_, BH 484^9.

mêterlic _metrical_, OEG.

metern = meteærn

mêterwyrhta m. _metrician, poet_, WW.

metesôcn f. _craving for food, appetite_, #Lcd# 65a.

metesticca m. _measuring-rod_, WW 126^35.

meteswam m. _edible mushroom_, WW.

metetîd f. _meal-time_, GD 277^24.

meteðearfende ¶ _needing food, destitute_.

meteðegn m. _seneschal, steward_, #Ex# 131.

meteðing n. _operation connected with cooking_, NC 309.

meteûtsiht f. _dysentery_, WW.

+metfæst _moderate, reasonable, modest_.

+metfæstan (æ^1, e^2) _to compare_, #LPs# 48^21.

+metfæstlic _moderate_. adv. -lîce _modestly, humbly, meekly_.

+metfæstnes f. _moderation, modesty_, BH.

metfæt = metefæt

+metfæt n. _a measure (vessel)_, Æ.

+metfest- = +metfæst-

metgeard f. _measuring-stick, rod, pole, perch_, WW 147^20.

±metgian _to moderate, control, govern_, Æ, CP: _weigh in mind,
consider_: _assign due measure to_.

+metgiend m. _ruler, governor_, AS 11^6.

±metgung f. _moderation, temperance_, AO, CP: _reflection, meditation_:
_rule, regulation_.

metgyrd = metgeard

metian I. _to supply with food, provision_. II. = metgian

mêting I. (±) f. _meeting (friendly or hostile)_, _assembly,
congregation_, RB 46^2: (+) _finding, discovery_. II. _painting,
picture_, Æ.

+metl¯æcan _to moderate_, CP 101^12.

+metlic _fitting, suitable_: _moderate_. adv. -lîce.

+metnes f. _moderation_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

+mêtnes = +mêtednes

metod ¶ m. _fate_: _Creator, God, Christ_.

metodsceaft ¶ f. _decree of fate, doom, death_. gewîtan m. sêon, tô
metodsceafte _to die_, B.

metodwang (meotud-) m. _battlefield_, #An# 11.

metrâp m. _measuring-rope, sounding-line_, Cp 178#b#.

mêtsceat = mêdsceatt

metscipe m. _feeding, meal_, _LL_ 178, 8, 1. ['_meteship_']

metseax n. _meat-knife_, AO.

±metsian _to supply with food_.

metsung f. _feeding, provisioning_, #Chr#.

+metta m. _sharer in food_, _Æ_. ['_mette_']

mettac = mattuc

mettas v. mete.

mette- = mete-

mêtte pret. 3 sg. of mêtan.

metten f. _one of the Fates_, #Bo# 102^22.

mettian = mêtan I.

+metting = +mêting

-mêtto v. wêa-m.  [[under "wêamêt"]]

mettoc (_Ep_) = mattuc

mettrum == medtrum

metud (N) = metod

mêðe (¶) _tired, worn out, dejected, sad_: _troublesome_. [_Ger._ müde]

meðel = mæðel

±mêðgian _to exhaust, tire out, impair_.

mêðian _to grow weary_, #Lcd# 57a.

mêðig _tired, weary_, AO.

meðl = mæðl, mæðel

meðl- = mæðl-, maðel-

mêðnes f. _fatigue_, OET (Bd^2).

+meðrian _to honour_.

mêw = m¯æw

mexscofl = meoxscofl

miccl- = micel-, micl-

micel (y) adj. comp. mâra, superl. m¯æst(a) _great, intense, much, many_,
_Æ, BC, Bo, Chr, Lcd_; AO, CP: (of time) _long_: _loud_. sb. with gen.
_much_, AO, CP. adv. _greatly, much_, _CP, Gen_. ['_mickle_']

micel¯æte (y) _greedy_, #Shr# 16^20.

miceldôend (i^2) _doing great things_, DR 45^7.

micelhêafdede _big-headed_, WW 380^12.

micelian = miclian

micellic _great, splendid, magnificent_. adv. -lîce _greatly, grandly,
splendidly_: _very, exceedingly_.

micelmôd _magnanimous_, #PPs# 144^3.

micelnes (y) f. _greatness, size_, Æ, CP: _multitude, abundance_:
_magnificence_.

micelsprecende _boasting_, #LPs# 11^4.

micelu (y) f. _largeness, size_, #Lcd#.

micg == mycg

micga m., micge f. _urine_, _Lcd_. ['_mig_']

micgða = migoða

micl- = micel-

micle, micles, miclum adv. (obl. cases of micel) _much, very, greatly_.

±miclian (y) _to become great, increase_, _An_; AO: _make great, make
larger, magnify, extol_, _Bl_. ['_mickle_']

±miclung f. _the doing of great things_.

micul = micel

mid I. prep. w. d. inst. (WS) and a. (A only) _with, in conjunction
with, in company with, together with_, _Æ, BC, BH, Chr_: _into the
presence of_: _through, by means of, by_, _BH, Gen_: _among, in_: _at_
(time): _in the sight of, opinion of_, _ÆL, MtL_. m. ealle, eallum
_altogether, completely, entirely_, _Æ, Chr_. m. ðâm _with that,
thereupon_. m. ðâm ðe _when_. m. ðâm ðæt _through that, on that account,
because, when_. m. ðý (ðe) _when, while_. II. adv. _at the same time,
together, simultaneously, likewise_, _Lcd_. ['_mid_'] III. = midd

midd superl. mid(e)mest _mid, middle, midway_, _BH, CP, Lcd_. tô middes
adv. _in the midst_. ['_mid_']

middæg m. _'mid-day,' noon_, _Lcd_: _one of the canonical hours, sext_,
_WW_. fram middæge oð nôn _from noon to 3 p.m._, Æ.

middæglic adj. _mid-day, meridian_.

middægsang m. _mid-day service, sext_.

middægtîd f. _noon_, WW 450^5.

middægðênung f. _dinner_, NC 309.

middan (on) v. onmiddan.

middandæglic = middæglic

middaneard (_Jn_) == middangeard

middangeard m. _the globe, world, earth_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP: _mankind_.
['_middenerd_'; _ON._ miðgarðr]

middangeardlic _earthly_, BH 118^19.

middansumer m. _midsummer (24 June)_.

middanwinter m. _midwinter, Christmas_.

midde I. adj. _mid, middle_. II. f. _middle, centre_ (only in phr. on
middan).

middel I. n. _'middle,' centre_, _El, Mk, Ps, WW_: _waist_, _Bl_. II.
adj. (superl. midlest) _middle, intermediate_, _BC, BH_.

middeldæg m. _mid-day, noon_, #Lcd#.

middeld¯æl m. _middle_, AO 10^6.

middelfinger m. _middle finger_.

middel-flêra m., -flêre f. _partition, septum_, WW.

middelfôt m. _instep_, WW 160^25.

middelgem¯æru npl. _central region_, #Sol# 255.

middelgesculdru np. _part of the body between the shoulders_, WW 159^17.

middelniht ¶ f. _midnight_.

middelrîce n. _the middle kingdom_, #Chr# 887#a#.

midden- = middan-

midde-niht, -neaht, middernæht (_LkL_) f. '_midnight_.' [v. ES 39·350]

middesumer = middansumer

middeweard I. adv. _in the middle of, through the midst_, _AO_. II. adj.
_middle_. III. sb. _middle_, _LPs_. ['_midward_']

middewinter = middanwinter

middun- (N) = middan-

mideard = middangeard

midel = middel

midemest v. midd.

midfæsten m. _mid-Lent_.

mid-feorh, -feorwe (CP), -ferh(ð) mn. _youth, middle age_, ('_juventus_'
#Gl#).

midfyrhtnes f. _middle age_, #Bl# 163.

midgearwung f. _preparation_, MkL p 5^10.

midgesîð n. _companion_, OEG 680.

midhelp [mið-] f. _help, assistance_, DR 29^18.

midhlýte m. '_consortium_,' NC 309.

midhrif nm. _'midriff,' diaphragm_, _Lcd_: _bowels_.

mid-hriðre, -hryðre n. _diaphragm_, _Cp, WW_. ['_midred_'; hreðer]

-midian v. â-.

mîdl n. _bit (of a bridle)_, Æ: _oar-thong_.

midle = middele, ds. of middel.

+midleahtrian _to reproach_? #Sc# 200^6.

midlen (e) n. _middle, centre, midst_.

midlencten n. _mid-Lent_.

midlest superl. of middel.

mîdlhring m. _ring of a bit_, WW 456^14.

+midlian _to halve, divide_, #VPs#.

±mîdlian _to bridle, check, curb_, CP: _muzzle_, W 191.

midligend m. _mediator_, BH 206^26.

midlung f. _middle, midst_. adv. -lunga _to a moderate extent_.

midmest v. midd.

midmycel = medmicel

midnedæg m. _mid-day_.

midnes f. _middle, midst_.

midniht f. _midnight_, Æ.

midor compar. of midd, adj.

midrâd f. _riding in company_, LL 175[4].

mîdrece = mýderce  [[headword spelled "myderce"]]

midrif = midhrif

midsingend m. _one who sings with another_, WW 129^25.

±midsîð(eg)ian _to accompany, associate with_.

midspecend m. _interlocutor_, MP 1·592.

midspreca m. _advocate_, ÆH 1·388.

midsumer (e^3) m. '_midsummer_,' _A_.

midswêgan *'_concinere_' #EPs# 57^3.

midðâm, midðy = mid ðam, mid ðý

midðeahtian _to consent_, RHy 6^27.

midweg m. _midway_, CP 399^13, GD 314^11.

midwinter m. '_midwinter_,' _Christmas_, _Lcd_.

midwist f. _presence, society_.

midwunung f. _living in company_, Æ.

midwyrhta m. _worker together with, co-operator_, CP.

midyrfenuma m. _coheir_, #Sc# 148^4.

mieht = miht

mielt pres. 3 sg. of meltan.

Mierce, Miercan pl. _Mercians_: _Mercia_, #Chr# (lit. _borderers_; cp.
mearc).

+mierce (e) n. _boundary, limit_, A 4·141^35: _sign, token_, MkL 16^17.

Miercisc _Mercian_, LL (e).

miere (e, i, y) f. '_mare_,' _BH, WW_. [mearh]

mierra m. _deceiver_, MtL 27^63 (e).

±mierran (e, i, y) _to 'mar,' disturb, confuse_, _CP_: _scatter,
squander, waste_: _upset, hinder, obstruct_, _Æ_; AO: _err_, _MtL_.

mierrelse (y) f. _cause of offence_, #Jul# 338.

mierrend (y) _prodigal, wasteful_, NC 311.

mierring (e, i, y) f. _hindering_: _squandering, waste_, CP.

±mîgan^1 _to make water_, #ÆGr#.

migeða = migoða

migga (Æ) = micga

miggung, mîging f. _making water_, WW.

migol _diuretic_, #Lcd#.

migoða m. _urine_, #Lcd#.

miht (a, æ, ea, e, ie, y) I. f. _'might,' bodily strength_, _Bl, Lcd_:
_power, authority, ability_, _BH_; Æ: _virtue_, _Lcd_: _mighty work,
miracle_, G. II. adj. ¶_mighty, powerful_: _possible_.

mihte pret. sg. of magan.

mihtelêas = mihtlêas

mihtelic, mihtlic _possible_. adv. -lîce _'mightily,' powerfully, by
might, miraculously_, _Æ, BH_.

mihtesetl n. _seat of power_, EETS 34·301.

mihtig (æ, ea) _'mighty,' important_, _BH, VPs_ (æ): _able, effective_,
_Lcd_: _possible_. adv. -lîce, _Bo_. ['_mightily_']

mihtlêas _powerless, weak, exhausted_, Æ.

mihtmôd n. _violent temper, passion_, #Ex# 149.

mihtu = miht ðu

mîl I. f. '_mile_,' _Bl, WW_; AO. [_L._] II. n. _millet_, _WW_.
['_mile_']

milc (#VPs#) == meolc

milde I. adj. _'mild,' merciful, kind, generous, gentle, meek_, _B, Bl,
Gu, LL_; AO, CP. II. adv. _mercifully, graciously_, _Cr_.

mildêaw = meledêaw

mildelic _propitious_. adv. _graciously, affably, kindly_, _AO_; Æ.
['_mildly_']

+mildgian _to mitigate_, #VPs#.

mild-heort, -heortlic _merciful, clement, compassionate_, _MtL_ (milt-);
AO, Æ. ['_mild-heart_'] adv. -lîce, Æ, CP.

mildheortnes f. _loving-kindness, mercy, pity_, _LL_; Æ, AO.
['_mildheartness_']

mildian _to become mild_, GPH 399.

mildnes f. _mildness, mercy_, NC 309.

milds == milts

milescian _to become mild, mellow_, WW. [milisc]

mîlgemæt m. _mile-measure, milestone_? KC 3·252^21.

mîlgemearc n. _measure by miles_, B 1362.

mîlgetæl n. _mile_, #Nar# 33.

milisc (e, y) _sweet, mild, mulled_.

mîlite _soldiers_, NC 309.

mîlitisc _military_, GD. [_L._ miles]

mîlpæð ¶ m. _distance reckoned by miles_? _road with milestones on it_?
#El, Ex, Run#.

+milscad _honeyed, mixed with honey_, WW (v. milescian).

milscapuldor f. _sweet apple tree_, #Gl#.

milt- = mild-

±miltan (e, y) (tr. and intr.) _to melt_, Æ: _digest_: _refine, purge_.

milt-coðe, -coðu f. _disease of the spleen_, #Lcd#.

milte mf. _'milt,' spleen_, _Gl, Lcd_; Æ. [_Ger._ milz]

miltesêoc _splenetic_.

miltestre = myltestre

miltewærc m. _pain in the spleen_, CP.

milts f. _mercy, compassion, benevolence, kindness, favour_, CP: (¶)
_joy_. [milde]

±miltsian (w. d.) _to compassionate, pity, show mercy_, _Bo, Mt, Ps_; Æ,
CP: _soften, make merciful_. ['_milce_,' '_i-milce_']

±miltsiend m. _pitier_.

miltsigendlic _pardonable, venial_, Æ.

miltsung f. (±) _mercy, sympathy, pity, indulgence, pardon_, Æ, CP:
_moderation, reduction (of punishment)_, LL 468[10].

miltwræc = miltewærc

milz = milts

mîma m. '_mime_,' _MH_.

+mimor (w. d.) _known_. adv. -lîce _by heart_.

min ¶? _small_: _common, vile_.

mîn I. pron. _my, 'mine,'_ _Æ, B, G_. mînes ðances _by my will_. II. gs.
of ic _of me_.

mind == mynd

mindôm? m. _state of exile_, #PPs# 54^7.

mine = myne

minet- = mynet-

minlic _petty_.

mînlîce adv. _in my manner_, WW 449^16.

minnæn _'manipulos,' sheaves_? #EPs# 128^7; '_magnalia_,' 105^21.

minne I. nap. of min. II. = myne

minnen = menen

±minsian _to diminish_.

minsung f. _parsimony_, OEG 3748.

mint? (MtR), minte f. '_mint_,' CP; Mdf. [_L._]

mio- = meo-

mircapuldur (Cp) = milscapuldor?

Mirce, Mircan = Mierce

mirce I. (y) adj. _murky, dark, black, uncanny, evil_, _B, Ph_. II.
adv.? #An# 1315. III. n. _murkiness, darkness_, _Da_ 448. ['_murk_']

mircels (e, y) mf. _sign, token, seal, signet_: _mark, marked place_,
ÆL: _trophy_, #Gu# 429. [mearc]

mire = miere

mîre = mînre gdfs. of mîn.

mirg-, mîrig- = myrg-

mirgð, mirhð = myrgð

mirr- = mierr-

misbegân anv. _to disfigure_, MtL 6^16.

misbêodan^2 (w. d.) _to ill-use, injure, do wrong to_, _LL, W_.
['_misbede_']

misboren _abortive_, _Lcd_: _degenerate_. ['_misborn_']

misbrôden _drawn aside_, WW 224^21.

misbyrd f. _abortion_, #Gl#.

misbyrdo f. _malformation_, #Lcd#.

misbysnian _to set a bad example_, ÆH 2·50.

miscalfian _to cast a calf_, WW 456^12.

miscenning f. _flaw in an indictment_: _payment for correction of such a
flaw_, v. LL 2·148; 184.

miscian _to mix, apportion_. [_L._]

miscrôcettan _to croak or shriek horribly_, #Guth# 36^1. [crâcettan]

miscweðan^5 _to speak ill, curse_, NG: _speak incorrectly_.

miscyrran (= ie) _to pervert_, #Met# 2^8.

misd¯æd f. _'misdeed,' evil deed, sin_, _CP_; Æ.

misdôn anv. _to do evil, transgress, do amiss, err_, _JnL, LL, W_.
['_misdo_']

mîse = mêse

misefesian _to cut the hair amiss_, _LL_ (254^13).

misendebyrdan (i^4) _to arrange amiss_, LL 382.

misenlic, misendlic = missenlic

misfadian _to order amiss_, LL.

misfadung f. _misconduct, irregularity_.

misfaran^6 _to go wrong, transgress_, CP: _fare ill_, _Æ, W_.
['_misfare_']

misfêdan (oe) _to nourish ill_, #EVPs#.

misfeng m. _misdeed, sin_, NC 309.

misfêran _to do wrong, err, transgress_, _Æ_. ['_misfere_']

misfôn^7 _to make a mistake, be deceived_: _fail to get_.

misgedwield n. _error, perversion_, #Jul# 326.

misgehygd fn. _evil thought_, #An# 772.

misgelimp n. _misfortune_, W 211^30.

misgemynd f. _evil memory_, #Sol# 495.

mis(ge)wider m. _bad weather, storm_.

misgrêtan _to greet amiss, insult_, Ct.

misgýman _to neglect_, _LL_. ['_misyeme_']

mishæbbende _being ill_, MtL 8^16.

mishealdan^7 _not to keep, to neglect_, Æ (9^130).

mishealdsumnes f. _want of observation, carelessness_, LL (196^3).

mishêrnes f. _act of disobedience_, W.

mis-hweorfed, -hwyrfed, -hworfen _perverted, inverted_.

mishýran _to hear amiss, not to listen to, disobey_, _RB, W_.
['_mishear_'; hîeran]

misl¯ædan _to 'mislead,'_ _Æ_.

misl¯æran _to teach amiss, give bad advice to_, ÆL 5·119.

mislâr f. _ill teaching, evil suggestion_.

mislêc- = mislîc-

mislic _unlike, various, manifold_, _Bl, Bo_; Æ, CP: _wandering,
erratic_. ['_mislich_'] adv. -lîce _in various ways, diversely,
aimlessly_, _Bo, Chr_. ['_misliche_']

mislîcian (w. d.) _to displease, disquiet_, _Æ, CP_. ['_mislike_']

mislicnes f. _variety, diversity_, Æ.

mislimp n. _misfortune_.

mislimpan^3 impers. w. d. _to go wrong, turn out badly_, AO.

mislybban _to lead a bad life_, _Æ_. ['_mislive_']

mismicel _of varying sizes_? #Ex# 373.

misr¯æcan _to abuse_, ÆH 2·590^25.

misr¯æd m. _misguidance_, Æ: _misconduct_, Æ.

misr¯ædan _to advise wrongly_, RB.

miss n. _absence, loss_ (Swt).

miss- = mis-

missan (w. g.) _to 'miss' (a mark), _B_: (w. d.) _escape the notice of a
person_.

missare = missere

misscrence _distorted, shrivelled_, #Guth#.

misscrýdan _to clothe amiss_, ÆH 1·530.

misse- = mis-

missenlic _various, manifold, different, diverse_, AO. adv. -lîce, CP.

missenlicnes f. _variety, diversity_: '_qualitas_'? GD 46^9.

missere ¶ n. _half-year, year_.

misspôwan^7 _to fare badly_, AO 82^34.

missprecan^5 _to grumble, murmur_.

mist m. '_mist_,' _Æ, Met, WW_: _dimness (of eyesight)_, _Æ, Lcd_.

mist- = mis-

mist¯æcan _to teach amiss_, _Æ_. ['_misteach_']

mistel m. _mistletoe_, _Cp, Ep_: _basil_, _Lcd_. ['_missel_']

mistellâm n. _birdlime_, WW 279^15.

misteltân m. '_mistletoe_,' _WW_ (i^2).

mistglôm m? _misty gloom_, #Whale# 47.

misthelm m. _covering of mist_, #Jul# 470.

misthlið ¶ n. _misty cliff, cloud-capped slope_.

mistian _to be or grow misty_, _Æ_. ['_mist_']

mistîd f. _evil time_, FM 360^12.

mistîdan (impers.) _to miscarry, fail_, _LL_ 348´. ['_mistide_']

mistig '_misty_,' _B_.

mistihtan _to lead astray, dissuade_, Æ.

mistihtendlic _dehortative_, #ÆGr# 225^12.

mistil- = mistel-

mistîmian [impers. w. d.] _to happen amiss_, _Bas_. ['_mistime_']

mistlic == mislic

mistran _to grow dim_, Æ.

mistrîwan _to mistrust_, DR 39^16.

mistûcian _to ill-treat_, #Chr# 1083, GD 15.

misðêon^3 _to mis-thrive, degenerate_.

misweaxan^6 _to grow improperly_, Æ.

miswendan _to pervert, abuse_, Æ: _be perverted, err_, Æ.

miswende _erring, ill-behaving_, Æ.

miswenian _to misuse, abuse_, #Sc# 224^10 (?= miswerian, MLN 25·80).

misweorc n. _misdeed_, JnR 3^19.

misweorðan^3 _to turn out amiss_, W.

miswider = misgewider

miswissian _to mislead_, LL 130; 381.

miswrîtan^1 _to write incorrectly_, _ÆGr_. ['_miswrite_']

miswurðian (= eo) _to dishonour, illtreat_, LL 381[25].

miswyssigan = miswissian

mîte f. _'mite' (small insect)_, _WW_ 122^6.

mitta m., mitte f. _a measure, bushel_, _Ct, WW_; Æ, CP. ['_mit_';
metan]

mittan = mêtan

mitte = mitta

mitting (Æ, AO) = mêting

mittý = mid ðý

mið (_LkL_) = mid

mîðan^1 _to hide, conceal_ (tr. and intr.), _keep to oneself,
dissemble_, _BH, Bo, WW_; CP: _conceal oneself, remain concealed_,
_Lcd_: (¶)_avoid, shun, refrain from_. ['_mithe_']

mîðl = mîdl

mix = meox

mixen (y) f. _dung-heap, dung_, _Æ, LkL_. ['_mixen_']

mixendynge (y^1) f. _dung_, LL 454[9].

mixenplante f. _nightshade (plant)_, #Lcd#.

mixforce (y) f. _dung-fork_, WW 106^39.

mixian = miscian

môd n. (±) _heart, mind, spirit_, _'mood,' temper_, _B, BH, Bl_; Æ, AO,
CP: _courage_, _B_; AO: _arrogance, pride_, AO: _power, violence_.

+môd _of one mind, harmonious, peaceful_, CP.

môdblind ¶ _blind, undiscerning_.

môdblissiende ¶ _exulting_.

môdbysgung f. _anxiety_, #Dom# 84.

môdcearig ¶ _sorrowful of heart_.

môdcearu ¶ f. _sorrow, grief_.

môdcræft m. _intelligence_.

môdcræftig _intelligent_.

moddor = môdor

moddren _of mothers_, #ApT# 4^12.

moddri(g)e = môdrige

môde- = môdig-

môdearfoð n. _grief of mind_, ¶Hy 4^87.

môdeg = môdig

môder == môdor

môdercynd = mêdrengecynd

môderge = môdrige

môdful _proud, haughty_, #Lcd# 3·188^26.

môdgehygd ¶ n. _thought_.

môdgemynd ¶ n. _mind, thought_.

môdgêomor ¶ _sad, dejected_.

môdgeðanc m. _thought, understanding, intellect, mind_.

môdgeðôht m. _thought, understanding, mind_.

môdgeðyldig _patient_, #An# 983.

môdgewinna m. _care_, #Gen# 2797.

môdgian = môdigian  [[under "môdigan"]]

môdgidanc (N) = môdgeðanc

môdglæd _joyous_, #Gu# 1311.

môdglêaw _wise_, #Sol# 180.

môdhæp? _brave_, #Ex# 242 (GK).

môdhete m. _hatred_, #Gen# 1756.

môdhord n. _secret thoughts_, #An# 172.

môdhwæt ¶ _brave, bold_.

môdig (CP), môdi _spirited, daring, bold, brave, high-souled,
magnanimous_, _B_; Æ: _impetuous, headstrong_, _Æ_; CP: _arrogant,
proud_, Æ, CP. ['_moody_']

môdigan, môdigian _to grow proud or overbearing, be high-minded, glory,
exult, show bravery_, Æ: _take offence through pride_, Æ.

môdiglic (môde-) _high-souled, lofty, proud_: _brave, bold_: _splendid,
magnificent_. adv. -lîce, _Ma_ (môde-). ['_moodily_']

môdignes f. _greatness of soul_: _pride, arrogance, haughtiness_, _Æ_.
['_moodiness_']

môdilic = môdiglic

môdlêas _spiritless_, #KGl# 66^40.

môdlêast f. _want of courage_, Æ.

môdlêof _dear, precious_, FT 28.

môdlufu f. _heart's affection, love_.

+môdod _disposed_, ÆH 1·524^18.

môdor (e^2) f., ds. mêder '_mother_,' _WW_; (_of animals_), _LL_;
AO, CP.

môdorcild (môð-) n. _a child of one's (own) mother_, #PPs# 68^8.

môdorcynn n. _maternal descent_, #Chr# 1067#d#.

môdorhealf f. _mother's side_, #Chr# 1076#d#.

modorhrif n. _womb_, #PPs#.

môdorlêas (e^2) _motherless_, W 228^22.

môdorlic (e^2) _maternal_, _ÆGr_. ['_motherly_']

modorlufu f. _love for a mother_, NC 309.

môdorslaga m. _matricide_, WW 335^6.

môdrige, môdrie f. _mother's sister, maternal aunt_, Æ, AO: _cousin_.
[môdor]

môdrôf _valiant_, #An# 1493.

môdsefa ¶ m. _heart, mind, spirit, soul_: _thought, imagination,
purpose, character_.

môdsêoc _sick at heart_, #Gen# 1235.

môdsêocnes f. _disease of the heart_, WW 199^35.

môdsnotor ¶ _wise_.

môdsorg ¶ f. _heart-sorrow_.

môdstaðol m. _principle, character_, LL (318^37).

môd-staðolnes, -staðolfæstnes f. _firmness of mind_, W 53^10.

+môdsumian _to agree_, CP.

+môdsumnes f. _agreement, concord_, CP.

môdswîð ¶ _resolute_.

môd-ðracu f. gs. -ðræce _courage_, B 385.

môdðrêa m. _anguish_, #Rd# 4^50.

môdðw¯ære _meek_, #LPs# 24^9.

môdðw¯ærnes f. _patience, meekness_, W.

môdur = môdor

môdw¯æg m. _proud wave_, #Ex# 499.

môdwelig _gifted, talented, wise_, ¶CP.

môdwlanc ¶ _stout-hearted_: _haughty_.

môdwyn f. _heart's joy, property_, #Rd# 87^7.

moetan (Cp) = mêtan

mohða, mohðe (N) = moððe

molcen n. _coagulated or curdled milk_. [cp. _Ger._ molke]

molda? m. v. molde II.

moldærn ¶ n. _grave_.

moldcorn n. _granular tuber of saxifraga granulata, and the plant
itself_, #Lcd#.

molde I. f. _sand_, _'mould,' loose earth, dust, soil_, _Cp, BH_; Æ:
_land, country_: _world_. =II?= f. _top of the head_, _Lcd_ (or molda?).
['_mould_']

moldern = moldærn

moldgewind n. _top of the head_, NC 310.

moldgræf ¶ n. _grave_.

moldhrêrende _moving upon earth_, #Creat# 27.

moldhýpe f. _heap of dust_, ÆH 1·492.

moldstôw f. _site, sepulchre_, GPH 391.

moldweg ¶ m. _earth_.

moldwyrm m. _earth-worm_, #Soul# 72.

molegn n. _curds_, #Gl#.

molegnstycce n. _piece of curd_, #Gl#.

moling = molegn

molsn n? _decay_, NC 310.

±molsnian _to moulder, decay_, Æ.

molten pp. of meltan.

momra = mamra  [[under "mamor"]]

mon == man

môna m. '_moon_,' _Bo, Lcd_; Æ, AO, CP.

mônan¯æfen m. _Sunday evening_, LL.

mônandæg m. '_Monday_,' _A, Jn_.

mônanniht f. _Monday eve, i.e. Sunday evening_, LL.

mônað m. nap. môn(e)ðas, mônað '_month_,' _BH, Bo, Lk, Lcd_; AO, CP.
[môna]

mônaðâdl f. _morbus menstrualis_, BH.

mônaðâdlig _menstruous_, BH 78^5.

mônaðblôd n. '_menstruum_,' WW.

mônaðbôt f. _penance lasting a month_, LL (278^11).

mônaðfylen f. _time of full moon_, OEG.

mônaðgecynd f. '_menstruum_,' #Lcd#.

mônaðlic _monthly, lunar_, #Gl#.

mônaðsêoc I. _menstruous_, Æ. II. = mônsêoc

mônaðsêocnes f. _lunacy_, #Lcd# 1·170^4.

moncus = mancus  [[under "mancs"]]

mond = mand

môndæg = mônandæg

mône f. = môna

mônelic _lunar_, Æ.

monetian _to despise_? #An# 746. [*manetian?]

+mong = +mang

monig == manig

mônlic = mônelic

monn == mann

mônoð = mônað

mônsêoc _'moonsick,' lunatic, epileptic_, _MtR_.

mont = munt

mônð = mônað

monuc = munuc

môr m. _'moor,' morass, swamp_, _B_; Mdf: _hill, mountain_, AO.

morað (ô?) n. _sweet boiled wine with herbs_. [_L._ moratum]

môrbêam (â, u) m. _mulberry tree, bramble_, _VPs_ (â). [v. '_more_']

môrberie f. _mulberry (fruit)_, ÆL 25^576.

more f. _carrot, parsnip_, _Lcd, WW_. ['_more_']

moreð = morað

môrfæsten n. _moor-fastness_, #Chr#.

môrflêoge f. _'cariscus,' a kind of fly_, NC 310.

morgen (a, e) m. ds. morgenne _'morn,' morning, forenoon_, _Æ, B, MtL,
VPs_: _sunrise_, _B_: _morrow_, CP. on mor(gen)ne (1) _in the morning_,
(2) _to-morrow_.

morgenceald ¶ _chill at morn_.

morgencolla m. _morning terror_, #Jud# 245.

morgendæg m. _morrow_: _morning_.

morgendlic = morgenlic

morgendrenc m. _morning drink_, #Lcd#.

morgengebedtîd f. _morning prayer_, #Guth# 40^25.

morgengifu f. _gift by a husband to his wife the morning after the
wedding_, _BC, WW_. ['_moryeve_']

morgenlêoht n. _dawn, morning_.

morgenlic _matutinal, morning_: _of the morrow_. morgenlica dæg
_to-morrow_.

morgenlong _lasting a morning_, B 2895.

morgenmæsse f. _morning mass, first mass_, ANS 84·2.

morgenmete m. _morning meal_.

morgenrên m. _morning rain_, #Az# 82.

morgensêoc _sad at morn_, #An# 241.

morgensp¯æc f. _regular meeting of a guild on the morrow after the
guild-feast_, _TC_. ['_morn-speech_']

morgenspell § n. _news published at morn_.

morgensteorra m. _morning star_, _Bo_. ['_morn-star_']

morgenswêg m. _cry at morn_, B 129.

morgentîd (a^1, e^1) f. _morning_.

morgentîdlic _matutinal_, #BPs# 129^6.

morgentorht _bright at morn_, #An# 241.

morgenwacian _to rise early_, WW.

môrh¯æð f. _mountain-heath_, #PPs# 82^10.

môrheald _heathy, marshy_? #Ex# 61.

môrhop n. _moor-swamp_, B 450.

môrig _marshy_, Æ.

môrland n. _'moor-land,' mountain-waste_, _LkL_.

morne ds., mornes gs. of morgen.

morod, moroð = morað

môrsceaða m. _robber from mountain heights_, NG.

môrsecg mn. _sedge_, #Lcd# 3·140^25.

môrseohtre f. _marshy ditch_, NC 310.

môrstapa m. _traverser of moors_, #Run# 2.

mortere m. _mortar_. [_L._ mortarium]

morð nm. _death, destruction, homicide, 'murder,'_ _AO_; Æ: _deadly
sin_. ['_murth_']

morð- = morðor-

morðcrundel mn. _barrow raised over a dead body_? _deadly pool_?
_corpse-pit_? KC 3·23´.

morðd¯æd f. _murder, deadly sin, crime_, Æ.

morðor nm., gs. morðres (mp. morðras) _deed of violence_, _'murder,'
homicide, manslaughter_, _B, Bl_: _mortal sin, crime_: _injury,
punishment, torment, misery_.

morðorbealu ¶ n. _violent death, murder_.

morðorbed § n. _bed of death (by violence)_.

morðorcofa m. _prison_, #An# 1006.

morðorcræft m. _murderous crime_, #An# 177.

morðorcwalu f. _murder_, NC 310.

morðorcwealm m. _murder, death_, #GnE# 152.

morðorhete m. _blood-feud_, B 1105.

morðorhof n. _place of torment_, #El# 1303.

morðorhûs n. _house of torment_, #Cr# 1625.

morðorhycgende § _with murderous thoughts_.

morðorlêan n. _retribution for sin_, #Cr# 1612.

morðorscyldig _guilty_, #An# 1601.

morðorslaga m. _homicide, murderer_, NG.

morðorslagu f. _homicide, murder_, NG.

morðorslege m. _homicide, murder_, LL (148^14).

morðorsleht (morðsliht) m. _slaughter, murder_.

morðorwyrhta m. _murderer_.

morðslaga (Æ) = morðorslaga

morðsliht = morðorsleht

morður = morðor

morðweorc n. _deadly work, act which causes death, murder_, LL.

morðwyrhta = morðorwyrhta

moru f. _parsnip, carrot_ (= more).

môrwyrt f. _moor-wort_, #Lcd# 48b.

môs n. I. _bog, marsh_, _BC_. ['_moss_'] II. n. _food, victuals_.
[_Ger._ mus]

môst, môste v. *môtan.

mot n. _mote, speck, atom_.

môt I. (±, usu. +) n. _'moot_' ('_gemot_'), society, assembly, court,
council_, _Chr, MtL_; Mdf. +m. wyrcan _to take counsel_: _litigation_,
_Bo_: (+) _conflict, encounter_. II. f. _toll, tribute_, MkL. [_Ger._
maut] III. pres. sg. of *môtan.

±môtærn (e^2) n. _place of meeting, court-house_, AO.

môtan* swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. môt, pres. 2 sg. môst, pres. pl. môton, pret.
môste _(may), to be allowed, be able to, have opportunity to, be
compelled to, must_, _Æ_; AO, CP. môste ic _would that I might_!
['_mote_']

+môtan = mêtan

môtbell f. _bell for summoning a moot_, _LL_. [v. '_moot_']

±môtbeorh m. _hill of meeting_, BC.

môtere m. _public speaker_, _WW_. ['_mooter_']

môtern = môtærn

môtgerêfa m. _moot-reeve, chairman of a moot_, EC 342´.

±môthûs n. _moot-hall, place of assembly_, _WW_; W. ['_moothouse_']

±môtian _to speak to, converse with, address, harangue_, _Æ_: _debate,
argue, plead_, _Hex_. ['_moot_']

môtl¯æðu sbpl. _courts, assemblies_? TC 433^22.

+môtlêah m. _meadow of meeting_, BC.

+môtmann m. _orator_, WW 164^35; 310^29.

+môtstede m. _place of meeting_, #Soul# 152.

±môtstôw f. _place of meeting, forum_.

môtung f. _conversation, discussion_, _OEG_. ['_mooting_']

môtweorð (u^2) _qualified to attend the moot_, EC 343´.

moðfreten _moth-eaten_.

môðor = môdor

moððe f. '_moth_,' _MtL_ (mohðe).

mucgwyrt f. _artemisia, mugwort_, #Lcd#.

mucxle = muscelle

mûdrica = mýderce  [[headword spelled "myderce"]]

mûga m. _'mow,' heap of corn_, _Æ_.

mugan* = magan

mugwyrt = mucgwyrt

mûha (_Cp_) = mûga

mûl m. _mule_. [_L._ mulus]

mûlhyrde m. _mule-keeper_, #ÆGr# 35^5.

multon pret. pl. of meltan.

+mun (w. g.) _mindful, remembering_, AO 48^11.

±munan (usu. +) pres. 1, 3 sg. man (mon), 2 manst, pl. munon, pret.
munde swv. _to think about, be mindful of, remember_, _Bl, Jul, Lk_; Æ,
AO, CP: _consider_. ['_i-mune_']

mund f. I. ¶ _hand_: _palm (of the hand, as a measure)_: _trust,
security, protection, guardianship_, Æ: _protector, guardian_: _the
king's peace_: _fine for breach of the laws of protection or
guardianship of the king's peace_, v. LL 2·555; 641. [cp. _Ger._
vormund] II. m. _money paid by bridegroom to bride's father,
bridegroom's gift to bride_, #Cr# 93. III. = mynd

mundbeorg m. _protecting hill_, #PPs# 124^2.

mundberd = mundbyrd

mundbora m. _protector, preserver, guardian, advocate_, Æ: _prefect_.

mundbryce (i^2) m. _breach of the laws of protection or guardianship_,
LL: _fine for the breach of such laws_.

mundbyrd f. _protection, patronage, help_: _fine for a breach of the
peace_, LL.

+mundbyrdan _to protect_, #Bo#.

mundbyrdnes f. _protection_: _security, independence_: _protector,
guardian, advocate_.

mundbyre = mundbyrde (ds. of mundbyrd)

mundcræft m. _protecting power_, #Lcd# 1·384^13.

munde v. munan.

+munde = +mynde

mundgripe ¶ m. _hand-grasp_.

mundheals f. _protection_? #Cr# 445.

±mundian _to protect, watch over, act as guardian of_, Æ.

mundiend m. _protector_, TC 525^8.

mund-lêow, -lêu, -lâu. f. _wash-hand basin_, WW. [_ON._ munnlaug]

mundrôf _strong with the hands_, #Rd# 84^3.

mundwist f. _guardianship, protection_, NC 310.

munec == munuc

munecian _to make a monk of_, _LL_. ['_monk_']

munetere = mynetere

mungung = mynegung

+muning f. _remembrance_.

munt m. _mountain, hill_, Æ, AO, CP. [_L._ montem]

muntælfen f. _mountain-nymph_, WW 189^4.

muntclýse f. _mountain prison_, W 84#h#.

muntland n. _hill-country_, Lk 1^39.

munuc m. '_monk_,' _BH, RB_ (e^2): (_used also of women_), A 27·255.
[_L._ monachus]

munucbehât n. _monastic vow_, HL 18^81,95.

munuccild n. _child intended for monastic life_, Æ.

munuccnapa m. _young monk_, GD.

munucgegyrela m. _monastic garb_, BH 34^27.

munuchâd m. _monastic orders, the monastic life_, _Æ, BH_; CP.
['_monkhood_']

munuchêap m. _company of monks_.

munucian (e^2) _to make a monk of_, _LL_. ['_monk_']

munuclic _monkish, monastic_, _BH_; Æ. adv. -lîce. ['_monkly_']

munuclîf n. _monastic life_, Æ: _cloister, monastery_, Æ, AO.

munucrêaf n. _monk's garb_, GD 27^17.

munucregol m. _monastic rule, mode of life_, Æ: _a body of monks under a
certain rule_, TC 544^12.

munucscrûd n. _monk's garb_, ÆP 142^5.

munucstôw f. _place of monks_, BH 236^25.

munucðêaw m. _monastic rule_, ANS 84·7.

munucwîse f. _fashion of a monk_, ÆL 6·247.

mûr m. _wall_. [_L._ murus]

mûrbêam = môrbêam

mûrberie = môrberie

murc _dismal, wretched_, #PPs# 145^6. [myrce]

murcian _to murmur, complain, repine, grieve_, CP.

murcn- = murc-

murcnere m. _complainer_, RB 21^5.

murcung f. _complaining, lamentation, sorrow_, CP.

murge = myrge

murnan^3 (and wv.) _to care, be anxious or fearful about_, _An, Bo,
Wald_: _'mourn,' sorrow, bemoan_, _Wy_: _long after_, _An_ 37.

murra = myrra

murre = myrre

mûs f. gs. mûs, mûse, nap. mýs '_mouse_,' _Bo_; Æ; Mdf: _muscle (of the
arm)_, _WW_ 158^6.

mus-celle, -cule f. _shell-fish, mussel_. [_L._]

muscflêote f? _a small fly found in wine_ (must-flêoge? BT), WW 121^22.

muscle = muscelle

mûsepise f. _mouse-pea, vetch_, WW 148^35.

mûsfealle (a^2) f. _mouse-trap_, WW.

mûsfealu _mouse-coloured_, WW 448^9.

mûshafoc n. _mouse-hawk, buzzard_, WW.

musle = muscelle

musscel (#Gl#) = muscelle

must m. _'must,' new wine_, _Bo_; Æ. [_L._ mustum]

-mûtian v. be-m.

mûtung f. _'mutuum,' loan_, WW 449^30.

mûð m. _'mouth,' opening, door, gate_, _Æ, BH, CP, Mt_.

mûða m. _mouth (of a river)_, _estuary_, AO, #Chr#: (¶) _entrance to a
house, door_.

mûðâdl f. _mouth-disease_, WW.

mûðberstung f. _eruption of the mouth_, WW.

mûðbona m. _devourer_, B 2079.

mûðcoðu f. _mouth-disease_, WW.

mûðettan _to blab out, let out_, Æ (6^160).

mûðfrêo _free to speak_, #PPs# 11^4.

mûðh¯æl n. _wholesome speech_, #Ex# 552.

mûðhrôf m. _palate_, OEG 332.

mûðlêas _mouthless_, #Rd# 61^9.

mûwa (_WW_ 348^6) = mûga

muxle = muscelle

myce? (ES 43·309), mycel (LWS) = micel

mycg (i) m. '_midge_,' _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

mycgern (i) n. _internal fat, suet_, _WW_. ['_midgern_']

mycgnet n. _mosquito-net_, WW 183^13 (i).

mycl- = micl-

myd- = mid-

mydd n. _bushel_, AO 190^12. [_L._ modius]

myderce f. _money-box, chest_, Æ.

mygg (#Gl#) = mycg

mýgð = m¯ægð

myhtig = mihtig

mýhð pres. 3 sg. of mîgan.

myl n. _dust_, JAW 32; ES 41·163. [_Ger._ müll]

mylc = meolc

mylcen adj. _of milk_.

myldan = miltan

-myldan v. be-m.

myle- = mylen-

mylen mf. '_mill_,' _KC, LL, RB_; Mdf.

mylengafol n. _mill-tax, mill-rent_? NC 310.

mylenhwêol n. '_mill-wheel_,' _Lcd_.

mylenscearp ¶ _sharpened on the grindstone_.

mylenstân m. _grindstone_, _WW_. ['_millstone_']

mylentroh n. _mill-trough, mill-conduit_, WW.

mylenwaru f., mylenwer m. _mill-weir, mill-dam_, Ct.

mylenwyrd, myleweard m. _tenant of a (manorial) mill_, _WW_.
['_millward_']

mylier (EC 179^1) = myle(n)wer?

mylisc, mylsc = milisc

mylma m. _retreat_? GPH 398^150.

myln = mylen

myltan = (1) meltan; (2) miltan

myltenhûs n. _brothel_, ES 9·39.

myltestre (e, i) f. _prostitute_, Æ. [_L._ meretricem]

myltestrehûs n. _brothel_, WW 186^2.

mymerian _to keep in memory, remember_, W 74^15.

+mynan = +munan

±mynd (usu. +) fn. _memory, remembrance_, _Æ, BH, Met_: _memorial,
record_, _Æ_: _act of commemoration_, _Bl, MH_: _thought, purpose_,
_Bl_. on +m. niman _to recollect_. ['_mind_']

+myndblîðe _memorial_, #EPs# 101^13; 134^13 (i).

+mynddæg f. _commemoration day, anniversary_, BH.

+mynde I. _mindful_, #El# 1064. II. _river-mouth_, BH 398^17
(v. JAW 31).

+myndewyrðe _worth mentioning_, BH 486^12.

±myndgian _to remember, be mindful of_: (w. g.) _remind_, _W_: _intend_:
_commemorate, mention_, _PPs_: _exhort, warn_: _demand payment_, LL 206,
1, 2. +myndgod _aforesaid_. ['_ming_']

myndgiend m. _one who reminds_, B 1105.

myndgung f. _admonition_, CP: _remembrance_.

±myndig _mindful_, _Mk_. se +myndiga _the aforesaid_. ['_mindy_']

+myndiglic = +myndlic

+myndiglicnes f. _remembrance_, #SPs# 101^13.

±myndlêas _foolish, senseless_, Æ.

+myndlic _memorable_. adv. -lîce _by heart_, Æ.

+myndlýst f. _madness_, ZDA 31^22.

+myndstôw f. _monument, tomb_.

+myndwyrðe = +myndewyrðe

myne I. ¶ m. _memory, remembrance_: _feeling, affection, love, favour_.
m. witan _to love_: _purpose, desire, wish_: _memorial_. [¶munan]
II. m. _minnow_, WW. III. = mene

+myne I. _mindful_, MtR 5^23. II. pres. subj. of +munan.

mynecen, mynecenu f. _female monk, nun_, _WW_; Æ. ['_minchen_'; munuc]

mynegian = myndgian

mynegiendlic _hortatory_, CM 30.

mynegung f. _warning, admonition, exhortation_, Æ: _claim_.

mynelic _desirable_, #Wid# 4.

mynescilling = menescilling

mynet n. _coin, money_, _Cp, Lcd, MtR_. ['_mint_'; _L._ moneta]

mynetcýpa m. _money-changer_, ÆH 1·412.

mynetere m. _'minter,' coiner_, _Æ_: _money-changer_, _Mt_; Æ.

mynetian _to coin_, LL 158[14].

mynetîsen n. _coinage_, ÆL 23^447.

mynetslege m. _minting, coinage_, ÆL 23^475.

mynetsmiððe f. _mint_, LL 158[14,1].

myng- = myneg-, myndg-

mynian _to intend, be impelled_: _direct oneself towards an object_, AS
1^9 (e).

mynig- = myneg-

mynit = mynet

mynle f. _desire_, #Met# 26^67.

mynnan = mynian

mynster (æ^2) n. _monastery, nunnery_, _BH_: _mother-church_,
_'minster,' cathedral_, _LL_. [_L._ monasterium]

mynsterbôc f? _minster-book_, NC 310.

mynstercl¯ænsung f. _purification of a minster_.

mynsterclûse f. _monastic enclosure, stall, cell_, CM 22.

mynsterfæder m. _abbot_, GD 293^1.

mynsterf¯æmne f. _nun_, BH 20^19.

mynstergang m. _act of joining an order of monks_, LL (146^23)

mynstergêat n. _monastery gate_, GD 145^2.

mynsterhâm m. _monastic house, monastery_.

mynsterhata m. _persecutor of monasteries_, W 165^28.

mynsterlic _monastic_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

mynsterlîf n. _monastic life_, Æ: _cloister, monastery_.

mynstermann m. _monk_, Æ.

mynstermunuc m. _monk who lives in a monastery (i.e. not an
anchorite)_, Æ.

mynsterprafost m. _provost of a monastery_, TC 434^4.

mynsterprêost m. _priest of a church or minster_, LL (254^8).

mynsterscîr f. _control of a monastery_, BH 458^11.

mynsterstede m. _monastic buildings_, GD 182^19.

mynsterstôw f. _place of a minster, town_, BH 160^16.

mynstertimbrung f. _building of a monastery_, GD 147^11.

mynsterðêaw m. _monastic custom_, BH 452^12.

mynsterðegnung f. _monastic service_, RB 85^17.

mynsterwîse f. _custom of a monastery_.

±myntan _to intend, determine, resolve_, _Æ, Bo_: _think_, _B, Jud_:
_bring forth_, #Sc# 215^1: _give up to_, LL 400[3]. ['_mint_,'
'_i-munte_']

myranhêafod n. _mare's head (a nick-name)_, #Chr# 1010#e#.

Myrce, Myrcan = Mierce

myrce == mirce

myre (Æ, AO) = miere

myrenæddra = merenæddra

myrgan _to be 'merry,' rejoice_, _PPs_.

myrge adj. (e, i, u) _pleasing, agreeable_, _Æ, Bo, Met_ (e): _pleasant,
sweet_, _DHy_ (e). adv. myriglîce _pleasantly, melodiously_, GD 286^1.
['_merry_']

myrgelêoð n. _epitaph_? BH 94^12 (#b#).

myrgen I. f. _joy, pleasure_, #Met# (Introd.) 5. II. == morgen

myrgnes f. _melody_, WW 33^31.

myrgð (e, i), myrhð f. _'mirth,' joy, pleasure, sweetness (of sound)_,
_Æ, Bo_.

myrig- = myrg-

mýrlic = m¯ærlic

myrr- = mierr-

myrra I. m. _sweet cicely (plant)_. II. (u) f. '_myrrh_,' _Æ_.

myrre f. = myrra

myrrelse f. _offence, scandal, stumbling-block_, #Jul# 338.

myrten I. n. _flesh of an animal which has died of itself, carrion_, LL.
II. adj. _dead (of animals which have not been killed)_, LL.

myrð = myrgð

myrðra m. _homicide, murderer_.

-myrðran, -myrðrian v. for-, of-m.  [[under "ofmyrðrian"]]

myrðrung f. _parricide, murder_, WW 467^21.

myrw- = mearuw- (v. mearu)

mýs v. mûs.

myscan _to afflict_, #PPs#.

+myscan _to defile_, OEG 17^47.

mysci sbpl. _flies_, #PPs# 104^27.

mýse = mêse

mytting = mitting

+mýðe n. (usu. pl.) _mouth, confluence, junction of two streams_,
BH, Ct.

myx = meox

myx- = mix-




=N=


nâ (ô) adv. conj. _not, no, not at all, not even, never, by no means_,
Æ, AO, CP. nâ ðæt ân _not only_. nâ...nâ _neither...nor_. ne nâ _nor_.
nâ mâ _no more_, _ÆGr, Bl_. ['_no mo_'] nâ mâre sb. _nothing more_, _Bo,
Mk_. ['_no more_']

nab- = naf-

nabban anv. pres. 1 sg. næbbe, 2 næfst, 3 nafað, næfð, pl. nabbað,
næbbað; pret. næfde (v. habban) _not to have, to lack, be without_, _Bo_
(+næfd), _Jn_; AO, CP. [v. '_have_']

naca ¶ m. _vessel, boat, ship_. [_Ger._ nachen]

naced = nacod

±nacian, +nacodian _to lay bare, strip_.

nacod, nacud (æ) (+) I. adj. _'naked,' nude, bare_, _Æ_; CP: _empty_:
_not fully clothed_. II. f. _nakedness_.

nacodnes (æ) f. _nakedness_, Æ.

næ adv. = ne

næbbað, næbbe v. nabban.

n¯æbre = n¯æfre

næcad (_Cp_ 499#e# '_exserta_') = nacod

±n¯æcan (hn¯æcan) _to kill_, Æ.

næced == nacod

næcedu f. _nakedness_, MFH 169.

næct = niht

nædder- = n¯æder-

nædderfâh _snake-coloured_, HL 15^183.

næddre (CP) = n¯ædre

næddrewinde f. _adder-wort_, WW 287^16.

n¯æderbîta m. _ichneumon_, WW.

n¯ædl (ê) f. '_needle_,' _Soul, WW_; Æ.

n¯ædre (ê) f. _'adder,' snake, serpent, viper_, _Mt_; AO, CP.

n¯ædrewyrt (der) f. _adder-wort_.

næfde pret. 3 sg. of nabban.

næfebor (A 9·263^3) = nafûgar  [[headword spelled "nafogâr"]]

næfig (NG) = næftig

næfne = nefne

n¯æfre (ê) adv. '_never_,' _B, Bo, Bl, G_; CP. [ne, ¯æfre]

næfst v. nabban.

næft f. _need, want, poverty_, #Sc# 157^3,7.

næftcyrrend _not returning_, CP 77^39. [neft, ne eft]

næftig _poor_, #Sc# 190^1.

±n¯ægan I. ¶ (ê) (often followed by wordum) _to accost, speak to_. II. =
hn¯ægan

nægel = nægl

nægen = ne mægen

nægl m. _'nail,' peg_, _AO_; Æ: _finger-nail, toe-nail, claw_, _Æ_:
_plectrum_, #Wyrd# 84: (in comp.) _handle_.

nægledbord ¶ _with nailed sides_.

nægledcnearr m. _nail-fastened vessel_, ¶#Chr# 937.

nægledcræt n. _iron chariot_.

nægledsinc n. _studded vessel_, B 2023.

±næglian _'to nail,' fasten with nails_, _MtLR_; Æ.

næglsex n. _knife for cutting the nails_, _WW_. [seax; v. '_nail_']

næglspere n. _(sharp) nail_, Cp 260#u#.

n¯æh = nêah

n¯æhsta = nîehsta

næht (_NG, VPs_) == niht

n¯æht = nâht

nællæs = nealles

næm = neom

n¯æm f. _taking, receiving_, NC 311.

+n¯æman _to take away_, #Guth# 14^11.

n¯æmel _receptive_, NC 311. [= numol]

n¯æming f. _bargain, contract_, WW 180^17.

næmne = nefne

+næmnian (LL 455´) = nemnian

næmniendlic = nemniendlic

n¯ænig pron. _no one, none, not any, no_ (used as sb. with gen. and as
adj.). n¯ænige ðinga (S 320) adv. _not at all, in no wise_. [ne, ¯ænig]

n¯ænig-wuht, -uht _in no wise, nothing_.

n¯æniht (NG) = nânwiht

n¯ænne v. nân.

n¯æp m. _turnip, rape_, _Cp, Lcd_. ['_neep_']

n¯æps¯æd n. _rape seed_, #Lcd#.

næpte = nefte

n¯ære, n¯æron (Æ, AO, CP) = ne w¯ære, ne w¯æron

n¯ærende ptc. _not being_. [ne, wesan]

n¯ærra = nêara

næs I. (AO, CP) = ne wæs. II. adv. _not, not at all_, CP. [= nalæs] III.
= næss. IV. pret. 3 sg. of nesan.

næsc _fawn-skin_, #Gl, Lcd#.

næse (NG) = nese

næsgristle f. _nose-gristle_, #Gl#.

næs-hlið n. dp. -hleoðum _declivity, slope (of a headland)_, B 1428.

næss (e), næssa m. _'ness,' cliff, headland, cape_, _B_: (¶) _earth,
ground_.

+næstan _to contend_ (wið), #Rd# 28^10.

næster _'caucale,' an umbelliferous plant_? _wild carrot_? WW 202^1.

næsðýrl n. _nostril_, Æ.

±n¯ætan _to annoy, afflict, press upon, subdue_, CP.

n¯æting f. _blaming_, CP 353^11.

n¯æðl = n¯ædl

nafa I. m. = nafu. II. = ne hafa imperat. of nabban.

nafað pres. 3 sg. of nabban.

nafela m. _navel_, Æ, AO.

nafeða m. _nave (of a wheel)_, WW 106^27.

nafogâr m. '_auger_,' _Gl, WW_.

nafu f. _nave (of a wheel)_, #Bo#.

nafula = nafela

nafulsceaft f. _navel_, #Lcd# 3·124^22.

+nâg _striking, pressing_? #Rim# 57?

nâgan* pres. 3 sg. nâh; pret. nâhte, nâhton _not to owe, not to be
bound, not to be allowed, to have no right to, not to own, not to have,
to lose, be unable to_, AO. nâhte _ought not_. [ne, âgan]

nâht (¯æ, âu, ô) I. n. _'naught,' nothing_, _Æ_: _wickedness,
evil-doing_, _CP_ (nâwht). instr. nâhte w. comparatives = _nothing_. II.
_useless, bad, poor_. III. adv. _not, not at all_, CP. [nâ, wiht]

nâhte v. nâgan.

nâhtfremmend m. _evil-doer_, #PPs# 58^2.

nâhtgîtsung [nâuht-] f. _wicked avarice_, CP 333^5.

nâhtlic _good for nothing, worthless, of no avail_, #Chr# 979#e#. adv.
-lîce _wickedly, badly_, _VPs_ (ô). ['_noughtly_']

nâhtnes f. _worthlessness_, #Chr# 449#a#.

nâhtscipe f. _worthlessness_, #Chr# 449#e#.

nâh-w¯ær, -w¯ærn adv. _'nowhere,' in no case, never, not at all_, _A, Æ,
Bl_; GD (ô).

nâhwæðer pron. and conj. _neither_, _CP_. ['_nauther_']

nâhwâr = nâhw¯ær

nâhwider _'no-whither,' nowhere_, _Bo, RB_.

nâhwonan adv. _from nowhere_.

nalæs, nalas, nales (AO, CP), nalles (CP), nals = nealles

nalde (N, #VPs#) = nolde pret. of *nyllan.

nam I. pret. 3 sg. of niman. II. (N) = ne eom

nâm f. _(legal) seizure_, LL.

nama (o) m. '_name_,' _Æ_; AO, CP: _noun_, #ÆGr#.

nambôc (o) f. _register of names (in a book)_, WW 342^11.

nambred (o) n. _register of names (on a tablet)_, WW 499^40. [_Ger._
brett]

namcûð _well-known, celebrated_, Æ.

namcûðlîce adv. _by name_, Æ.

±namian _to 'name,' mention_, _Æ_: _nominate, appoint_.

namm¯ælum adv. _by name_, OEG 880.

+namna m. _companion_, #Rd# 53^3; 54^13?

namnian _to address, invoke_, Æ.

nâmon pret. pl. of niman.

nâmr¯æden f. _learning_, WW 431^8.

nân as. n¯ænne, nânne I. pron. and adj. _'none,' not one, no_, _Bl, Chr,
Ct, HL_. nâna ðinga _on no account_. II. sb. w. g. _none, no one,
nothing_, _Bo, Jn, RB_. [nê, ân]

nân-wiht, -(w)uht I. n. (often w. g.) _nothing, naught_, AO, CP. II.
adv. _not at all, in no wise_.

nâp pret. 3 sg. of nîpan.

nard m. _spikenard, unguent_. [_L._ nardus]

nart (_JnL_) = neart

naru = nearu

nas = næs = ne wæs  [[form of "wesan"]]

nâst (= ne wâst) v. nytan.

nasðýrl = næsðýrl

nasu = nosu

nât (_Bo, Jn_) = ne wât, v. nytan.

nâteshwôn (Æ), nâteðæshwôn adv. _not, not at all, by no means_.

nâthwâ adj. pron. _some one (nescio quis)_.

nâthw¯ær adv. _somewhere or other_.

nâthwæt pron. _something or other_.

nât-hwilc, -hwylc adj. pron. (indef.) _(I know not which), some one or
other_.

nâtôhwôn, nâtôðæshwôn = nâteshwôn

nâðêl¯æs (AO) = nâðýl¯æs

nâðer (Æ, AO, CP), nâðor (Æ) = nâhwæðer

nâðinc n. _nothing_, HL 18^48.

nâðýl¯æs _notwithstanding, nevertheless_, AO (ê^2).

nâuht = nâht

nâwa adv. _never_, #Lcd# 94b. [ne, âwa]

nâwer = nâhw¯ær

nâwêrn [= nâhw¯ærn] adv. _nowhere_, WW.  [[under "nâhw¯ær"]]

nâwht, nâwiht = nâht

nâwðer = nâhwæðer

nâwuht (CP) = nâwiht, nâht  [[under "nâwht"]]

ne I. adv. _not, no_, Æ, CP. II. conj. _neither, nor_, Æ, CP.

nêa- = nêah-

nêad = nîed

nêad- v. also nîed-, nýd-.

nêadclamm n. _necessity, extremity_, #LPs# 106^28.

nêadcofa m. _prison_, #An# 1311.

nêadgafol n. _tax, tribute_, LL.

nêadgewuna m. _enforced custom_, WW 221^8.

nêadgylda m. _debtor_, WW 221^10.

nêadhâd m. _compulsion, force_, WW 480^21.

nêadh¯æs f. _order which one must obey_, LL 12.

±nêadian _to compel, force, constrain, urge, impel_, Æ.

nêadignes f. _obligation_, OEG 2106.

nêadinga (AO), nêadlunga = nêadunga

nêadðearflic _necessary, useful_. adv. -lîce, #ÆGr#.

nêadðearfnes f. _opportunity, occasion_, #LPs# 9^22.

nêadðing n. _necessary thing_, RB 57; ÆP 13^7?

nêadung f. _compulsion_, Æ.

nêadunga, nêadunge adv. _compulsorily, forcibly_, Æ.

nêadwîs _needful, fitting, due_, Æ. adv. _of necessity_, Æ.

nêadwîsnes f. _necessity_, OEG 2396.

nêadwîte n. _inevitable punishment_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

nêadwraca m. _avenger by necessity_, TC 611^29.

nêah I. (e, i) [comp. nêara, superl. nîehsta q.v.] adj. _'near,' nigh,
close_, _BH_; AO, CP: _late_. II. adv. _'near,' nigh, about, almost,
nearly, lately_, _AO, Bo, G, Lcd, Met_, _etc._; CP. nêar and nêar
_nearer and nearer_. æt nîehstan _next, at length, finally_. III. prep.
w. d. _near, close to_: _according to_, AO.

+nêah I. ¶ _sufficiency, abundance_. II. pres. 3 sg. of +nugan.

nêahbûend m. _neighbour_, #Rd# 26^2.

nêahceaster f. _nearest town_, BH 52^27 (nêh-).

nêahcyrice f. _neighbouring church_, GD.

nêahd¯æl m. _neighbourhood_, GD 71^30.

nêahdûn f. _neighbouring hill_, #Nar# 14^6.

nêahêa f. _neighbouring river_, #Nar# 22^9.

nêahêaland n. _neighbouring island_, MH 84^17.

nêahfæder m. '_vicinus pater_,' GD 179^7.

nêah-feald, -fealdlic (GD) _intimate_.

nêahfrêond (ê^1) m. _near friend, near kinsman_, #Guth# 56^22.

nêahgangol (w. d.) _placed near_, ÆL 23^131.

nêahgebûr m. '_neighbour_,' _CP_.

nêahgebýren (nêhhe-) f. _neighbour_, LkL 15^9.

nêahgebýrild (nêhe-) m. _neighbour_, LkL 15^9.

nêahgehûsa (ê) m. _neighbour_, #JVPs#.

±neah-he, -hi(g)e (usu. +) _sufficiently_: _abundantly_: _often,
frequently_: _earnestly_.

nêahhebûr = nêahgebûr

+neahhelîce (nehl-) _sufficiently, frequently, usually_, LL, #Guth#.

nêahhergung f. _war close at hand_.

neah-hie, -hige = neahhe

+nêahian _to draw near to_, #LPs# 90^10.

nêahl¯æcan = nêal¯æcan

nêahland n. _neighbourhood_, GD 69^28.

nêah-m¯æg m. nap. -mâgas _near relation_.

nêahm¯ægð f. _neighbouring tribe_, BH.

nêahmann m. _neighbour_, BH.

nêahmunt m. _neighbouring mountain_, GD.

nêahnes f. _nearness, neighbourhood_, BH.

nêahnunnmynster _neighbouring convent_, BH 254^10.

nêahsibb I. adj. _related_. II. f. _affinity, relationship_.

nêahsta = nîehsta

nêahstôw f. _neighbourhood, place near_.

neaht (_Met_) = niht

nêahtîd f. _approaching time_, BH 290^29.

nêahtûn (ê) m. _neighbouring town or village_.

nêahðêod f. _neighbouring nation_, AO.

nêahwæter n. _neighbouring piece of water_, #Nar# 22^24.

+nêahwian (ê) _to draw near, cleave to_, NG.

nêahwudu m. _neighbouring wood_, GD 229^20.

±nêal¯æcan (w. d.) _to draw near, approach_, _Æ_; AO, CP: _be near_, GD
85^9: _cling to_, #CPs# 136^6. ['_nehleche_'; nêah, l¯æcan]

nêal¯æcung f. _approach, access_, Æ.

nêalic (ê) _near, neighbouring_. adv. -lîce _nearly, about_, _Bl_; CP.
['_nighly_']

nealles adv. _not, not at all, by no means_, CP.

neam = neom

nêam- = nêahm-

nêan adv. _from near by_: _close at hand, near_: _nearly, about_.

+nêan = +nêhwian  [[under "nêahwian"]]

neap = hnæpp

nêar comp. of nêah, adv. _near, nearer_, AO.

+near = +ner

nêara, nêarra (AO), comp. of nêah, adj. _later, latter, nearer_.

neara- = nearo-

nearo (AO) = nearu

nearobregd f. _crafty trick_, #Jul# 302.

nearocræft m. _skill in enclosing_? B 2243.

nearofâh _intensely hostile_? B 2317.

nearogrâp f. _close grasp_, #Rd# 81^6.

nearolic _oppressive, straitened_, #El# 913. adv. -lîce _narrowly,
closely, briefly, accurately_, Æ, CP: _strictly, stringently,
oppressively_.

nearonêd f. _urgent need_.

nearones f. _strait_, AO: _oppression_: _distress, anxiety, trouble_.

nearoðancnes f. _wickedness_, #LPs# 27^4.

nearoðearf f. _dire need_, #Cr# 69.

neart _art not_, _Bo_. ['_nart_'; ne eart]

nearu I. ¶ f? n? gs. nearu, near(o)we _strait, danger, distress,
difficulty_. n. ðrôwian _to be in straits_: _confinement, imprisonment_:
_prison, hiding place_. II. adj. _narrow, confined_, _AO, G_: _limited,
petty_: _causing or accompanied by difficulty, hardship, oppressive_,
_Bl, Rd_: _strict, severe_, CP. ['_narrow_']

nearu- = nearo-

nearusearu ¶ f. _dark cunning_? _imprisonment_?

nearusorg f. _crushing distress_, #El# 1261.

nearuðanc m. _wickedness_, OEG.

nearuwrenc m. _evil trick_, #Mod# 44.

nearwe adv. _narrowly, closely, strictly_, _B, Met_: _carefully,
exactly_, _El_; CP: _oppressively, forcibly_: _artfully_: _anxiously_.
['_narrow_']

nearwelîce = nearolîce

nearwian (±) _to force in, cramp, confine, afflict_: _become smaller,
shrink_.

nearxnewang = neorxnawang

nêasian (#VPs#) = nêosian  [[under "nêosan"]]

nêat n. _animal, beast, ox_, _CP, VPs_; pl. _cattle_. ['_neat_']

+nêat m. _companion, follower (esp. in war)_, _Chr, WW_: _dependant,
vassal, tenant who works for a lord_, v. LL 2·427. [v. '_geneat_']

nêaten = nîeten

±nêatland n. _land of a dependant or vassal_, LL 196, 1, 1.

+nêatmann = +nêat

+nêatriht n. _regulations as to the tenure of_ 'genêatland,' LL 445[2].

+neatscolu f. _band of comrades_, #Jul# 684.

nêawest (AO, CP), nêawist (Æ) fm. _neighbourhood, nearness, presence_:
_society, cohabitation_. [nêah, wesan]

nêawung (N) f. _nearness_.

nebb n. _bill, beak, beak-shaped thing_, _Cp, Ph_: _nose_, _LL_: _face,
countenance, complexion_, _Æ, CP_. ['_neb_']

nebb- = neb-

nebbian _to retort upon, rebuke, confront_, ÆH 1·256.

nebcorn n. _pimple_, #Lcd# 1·118.

nebgebræc n. _nasal mucus_, WW.

nebsealf f. _antimony, face-powder_, OEG.

nebwlâtful _barefaced, shameless_, OEG 2^317.

nebwlâtung f. _barefacedness, impudence_, OEG 4306.

nebwlite m. _face, countenance_, Æ.

nechebûr = nêahgebûr

necti- = nihte-

ned = net(t)

nêd = (1) nîed; (2) nêod

nêd- (A) = nêad-, nîed-, nýd-

nêdl = n¯ædl

nêdre (#VPs#), neddre = n¯ædre

nefa m. (±) _nephew_, Æ, AO: _stepson_: _grandson_.

nefene f. _granddaughter_: _niece_.

nefne = nemne

nêfre = n¯æfre adv.

nefte f. _cat's mint_. [_L._ nepeta]

nêfugol m. _bird of prey_, #Gen# 2158. [*nêo, _corpse_; _Goth._ naus]

nêgan = n¯ægan

negled- = nægled-

nêh == nêah

+nehe, +nehh(ig)e = +neahhe

nêhst = nîehst

nêhsta = nîehsta

neht == niht

neirxnawong (N) = neorxnawang

nêista = nîehsta

nele (AO, CP) = nelle (Æ) pres. 1, 3 sing., nelt = pres. 2 sg. of
nellan.

nellan = *nyllan

nem-nan, -nian (±) _to name, call_, Æ, AO, CP: _enumerate_: _address,
speak to_: _nominate_: _mention, relate_, Æ. [nama]

nemne (A; = WS nymðe) conj. and prep. _unless, except, save, only_.

nemnian = nemnan

nemniendlic, nemnigendlic _naming, nominative_, #ÆGr# 22^10.

nemning f. _name_.

nemðe = nymðe

nenâ (WW 252^1) = ne nâ v. nâ.

nênig (#KGl#) = n¯ænig

nêobedd ¶ n. _corpse-bed, bed of death_. [_Goth._ naus]

nêod I. f. (ê, îe, ý) _desire, longing_: _zeal, earnestness_: _pleasure,
delight_. [_Goth._ niuðs] II. == nîed

nêode adv. (instr. of nêod) _eagerly, zealously, diligently_.

nêodfracu f. _yearning, greed_, #Met# 31^15 (v. ES 39·335).

nêodfrêond m. _kinsman, friend_, HL 18^150. [nîed]

nêodful _zealous, earnest_, #Jul# 720.

nêodhus n. _necessary chamber_, NC 312.

±nêodian (= êa; impers. w. g.) _to be necessary, require, be required_,
_RB_. ['_need_']

nêodlaðu f. _wish_, B 1320.

nêodlîce adv. _eagerly, carefully, zealously, diligently_, Æ: (¶)
_greatly_.

nêodlof n. _zealous praise_, #PPs# 148^12.

nêodspearuwa m. (_restless_?) _sparrow_, #PPs# 123^6.

nêodðearflic _necessary_, GD 148^6.

nêodweorðung f. _zealous honouring_, #PPs# 142^11.

neofa = nefa

nêol == neowol

nêo-l¯æcan (#VPs#), -lêcan (_MtL_) = nêal¯æcan

neom = ne eom (_am not_)

neoman = niman

nêomian _to sound sweetly_? #Wyrd# 84.

nêon = nîwan

+nêopan^2? _to engulf, overwhelm_, #Ex# 475.

nêor adv. = nêar

+neorð _contented_, Cp 544.

neorxnawang m. _Paradise_, Æ, CP; v. GK.

neorxnawanglic adj. _of paradise_, GD 179^1.

nêosan, nêosian (Æ) _to search out, find out, inspect_: (±) _visit, go
to_: _attack, visit with affliction_.

nêosîð m. _death_, #Mod# 55.

neosu = nosu

±nêosung f. _access_: _visitation, visit_, Æ.

nêotan^2 (usu. w. g.) _to use, have the use of, enjoy, employ_. [_Ger._
geniessen]

nêoten = nîeten

neoð-an, -ane (i) adv. _below, down, beneath, from beneath_, _Æ, Bl, Bo_
(-on). ['_nethen_']

neoðanweard adj. _lower_, WW 26^6 (io).

neoðe- = niðe-

neoðon == neoðan

neoðor = niðor

neoðor- = niðer-

neoðoweard = niðeweard

neoðra = niðera

nêow- = nîw-

neowel = neowol

nêowêrno (WW 454^28) = nâwêrn

neowol (i) _precipitous_: _headlong_: _prone, prostrate_, _Æ, Bo_ (i):
_obscure, deep down, abysmal_. ['_nuel_']

neowollic (i^1, e^2) _profound, deep_, ÆL 7^66.

neowolnes f. _depth, abyss, chasm_, Æ(i^1).

nêp only in phr. forðganges n. _without power of advancing_? #Ex# 469.

nêpflôd m. _neap-tide, ebb, low tide_, #Gl#.

nepte = nefte

±ner (ea) n. _refuge, protection_, ÆL, AO.

nêr = nêar

+ner-ednes, -renes f. _deliverance_.

nergend m. _saviour, preserver (Christ, God)_.

±nerian _to save, rescue, liberate_, Æ, AO, CP: _preserve, defend,
protect_. [_Goth._ nasjan; _Ger._ nâhren]

neriend, nerigend = nergend

nêrra = nêar(r)a

+nerstede m. _refuge, sanctuary_, WW 186^23.

nerung f. _guard, protection_, OEG 5395.

nerw- = nearw-, nirew-

nerx- = neorx-

±nesan^5 (usu. +) _to escape from, survive, be saved_.

nese (æ) adv. _no_, Æ, CP. [ne, sî]

ness = næss

nest I. n. '_nest_,' _MtL, Ph_; Æ: _young bird, brood_. II. n. _food,
provisions, victuals_.

nêst = nîehst

nêsta (#VPs#) = nîehsta

nestan _to spin_, NG.

nestig = nistig

nestlian _to make a nest_, #LPs# 103^16.

nestpohha m. _wallet_, MtL 10^10.

net = nett

net- = nyt-

neta m. _caul_, WW 266^20.

netan = nytan

netel, netele f. '_nettle_,' _Lcd_.

nêten (_Bo, VPs_) == nîeten

netenes = nytennes

nêtl (_Cp_) = n¯ædl

netle (_Cp_) = netele  [[under "netle"]]

neton = nyton pres. pl. of nytan.

netrâp m. _snare, gin_, WW.

nett (y) n. '_net_,' _Æ, Bo, WW_: _netting, network, spider's web_,
_PPs_. [_Goth._ nati]

nette (y) f. _the net-like caul_, WW.

nettgern n. _knitting yarn_, EC 377. [gearn]

+nettian _to ensnare_, OEG 4596.

±nêðan _to venture on, dare, risk_, AO. [nôð]

+nêðedlic = +nîededlic

+neðerian = +niðerian

nêðing f. _boldness, daring_, AO.

nêðl (A) = n¯ædl

neurisn f. _aneurism_, #Lcd#.

newesêoða (i^1) m. _pit of the stomach_? _bowels_? #Lcd#.

nêwest = nêawest

nêxt (LWS) == nîehst

nî- = nîg-, nîw-

nic, nice adv. _not I_ (= _no_). [ne, ic]

nicor (e^2) m. nap. nicras _water-sprite, sea-monster_, _B, Bl_:
_hippopotamus, walrus_, _Nar_. ['_nicker_']

nicorhûs n. _sea-monster's dwelling_, B 1411.

nîd = nîed

nîd- = nêad-, nîed-, nýd-

nîed I. (ê, êa, êo, î, ý) fn. _'need,' necessity, compulsion, duty_, _B_
(ý), _BH_ (ê), _NG_ (ê); AO, CP: _errand, business_, _Æ_ (êo):
_hardship, distress, difficulty, trouble, pain_, AO: _force, violence_,
_VPs_ (ê): _what is necessary_: _inevitableness_: _fetter_, #Deor# 5:
_name of the rune for =n=_. II. = nêod

nîed- v. also nêad-, nýd-.

nîedan (ê, î, ý) _to compel, force, urge, press_, _Æ_ (ý), _Bo, NG_ (ê);
AO, CP. ['_need_']

nîedbâd (ê, ý) f. _toll, exaction, blackmail_.

nîedbâdere (ê) m. _toll-collector_, TC 29^10.

nîedbeh¯æfdlic _necessary_, BH 396^24.

nîedbeh¯æfednes f. _necessity_, Æ (ê^1).

nîedbehêfe _needful, necessary_, Æ(y^1).

nîedbeðearf (y^3) _necessary_, CP 7^7.

nîede, nîedes (êa, êo, î, ý) adv. (instr. and gs. of nîed) _of need,
needs, necessarily, compulsorily_, CP.

+nîededlic (ê) _compulsory_, BH 62^23 (v.l.).

nîedenga, nîedunga adv. _necessarily, by force, forcibly_, CP.

nîedfaru ¶ f. _compulsory journey, death_.

nîedh¯æmed (ê, ý) n. _rape_, LL.

nîedhîernes (e^1, e^2) f. _slavery_, DR 6^5.

nîedling m. _slave_, AO: _sailor_.

nîedmicel (ê) _urgent_.

nîedn¯æm f. _seizure_.

nîedscyld f. _moral necessity_, CP 57^6.

nîedsibb (êa) f. _relationship_, OEG.

nîedðearf I. f. _need, necessity, compulsion, force_, CP: _distress_:
_want, thing needed_. II. adj. _necessary_.

nîedðearfnes (êa, ê, ý) f. _need, necessity_: _compulsion_: _distress,
trouble_.

nîedðêow (ê, ý) m. _slave_.

nîedðrafung f. _reproof_, CP 297^22.

nîedw¯ædla m. _poor wretch_, #Gen# 929.

nîehst I. adv. (superl. of nêah) _most nearly, in closest proximity_:
_last (in time)_, _Bl, Gen_ (ê). II. adj. _latest, last_, _Æ, Jud, VPs_
(ê): _nearest, 'next,'_ _CP, Chr, KC, MkL_ (ê). æt nîehstan _at last,
next_.

nîehsta mf. _closest friend_, _CP_: (±) _neighbour_, _MkL, VPs_: _next
of kin_, _LL_. ['_next_']

nieht (CP) = niht

nierwan = nearwian

nîeten (ê, êo, î, ý) n. _small animal, beast, cattle_, _Bo, Lcd_; AO,
CP. ['_neten_'; nêat]

nîetencynn n. _kind of animal_.

nîetenlic _animal, brutish_, #Bo# 35^28 (ê). adv. -lîce _like an
animal_, W 55^16 (ý).

nîetennes f. _brutishness_, Æ (ý).

nieðemest = niðemest

nieðer == niðer

nîewe = nîwe

nîfara m. _new comer, stranger_, #PPs# 38^15.

nifol _dark, gloomy_ [= neowol]

nift f. _niece_, _BH, Ep, TC_: _granddaughter_: _step-daughter_.
['_nift_']

nîg- = nîw-

nigan == nigon

nîge- = nigo-

nîgecyrred _newly converted_, OEG 3447.

nîgefara = nîfara

nîgehalgod _newly consecrated (of a king)_, _newly crowned_, ÆL 18^326.

nîgehwyrfed _newly converted_, ÆL 5^126.

nigenda = nigoða

nîghworfen _newly converted_, ÆH 2·130^27.

nigon '_nine_,' _A, Bl, Chr_; AO, CP.

nigonfeald '_ninefold_,' _ÆGr_.

nigongylde _entitled to ninefold compensation_, LL 470[7].

nigonnihte _nine days old_, ANS 129·22.

nigontêoða '_nineteenth_,' _Chr_: '_ninetieth_,' OEG 2521 (nigen-).

nigontîene (ý^3) '_nineteen_,' _A, Men_.

nigontig '_ninety_,' _Lk_; CP.

nigontýnlic _containing the number nineteen_.

nigonwintre _nine years old_, AO 186^10.

nigoða (y) '_ninth_,' _Bl_; MH (y): _ninth part_, _Bl_.

nigoðe _ninthly_, LL 181[9].

nîgslýcod ptc. _freshly smoothed, glossy_, MH 206^27.

nigun = nigon

nîh (#KGl# 55^25) = nêah

nihold (#Gl#), nihol = neowol

nîhst = nîehst

nîhsta = nîehsta

nihstig = nistig

niht (æ, e, ea, ie, y) f. (gs. also nihtes) '_night_' (often used in
enumerations where mod. Eng. uses days); _darkness_, _BH, Bl, Cr, Lcd_;
AO, CP.

niht- = nyht-

nihtbealu n. _destruction by night_, B 193.

nihtbutorflêoge f. _beetle or moth which flies by night_, WW 121^13; A
8·450.

nihtêage _that can see at night_, WW.

nihteald _(night-old), that has happened yesterday_, LL.

nihtegale (a, æ, e) f. _nightingale_, _Cp_: _night-jar_. ['_nightgale_']

nihtêge = nihtêage

nihtegesa m. _nocturnal terror_, #PPs# 90^5.

nihtelic = nihtlic

nihterne adv. _by night_: _during a night_, #Lcd#.

nihternnes f. _night season_, #Lcd# 3·288^21.

nihtes (æ) adv. (gs. of niht) _by night_, Æ.

nihtfeormung ¶ f. _shelter at night_.

nihtgenga ¶ m. _night-goer, goblin_.

nihtgenge f. _night-prowler, hyæna_, WW.

nihtgerîm ¶ n. _number of nights_.

nihtgild n. _night sacrifice or service_, #Gl#.

nihtglôm m? _gloom of night_, #Gu# 916.

nihthelm ¶ m. _shades of night_.

niht-hræfn, -hrefn, -hremn m. _night-raven, night-jar_.

nihthrôc m. _night-raven_, #LPs# 101^7.

nihthwîl f. _space of a night_, W 147^9.

+nihtian _to become night, grow dark_, NC 295.

nihtlang _lasting through the night_, Æ. adv. -langes, Æ.

nihtlic _nocturnal, of the night, at night_, Æ, CP.

nihtnehstig _having fasted for a night_, #Lcd#.

nihtremn = nihthræfn

nihtrest f. _couch_, #Gen# 2863.

nihtrîm = nihtgerîm

nihtsang m. _compline_: _book of service for compline_.

nihtscadu (a^3) _night-shade (plant)_, WW 135^3.

niht-scûa ¶ m., gs. -scu(w)an _shades of night_.

nihtsl¯æp m. _night's sleep_, ÆL 23^442.

nihtsum = nyhtsum

nihtwacu f. _night-watching_, _Seaf_ 7. ['_night-wake_']

nihtwæcce f. _'night-watch,' vigil_, _Lk_.

nihtwaru f. _clothing for night_, RB 90^4.

nihtweard m. _guardian at night_, #Ex# 116.

nihtweorc n. _deed done at night_, B 827.

nîhð (MP 1·613) pres. 3 sg. of nêahwan.  [[variant of "nêahwian"?]]

nîhwyrfed (OEG 3138) = nîgehwyrfed

nîl¯æred _newly initiated_, OEG 3138.

nile = nyle, pres. 1 sg. of *nyllan.

±niman^4 (eo, io, y) _to take, assume, undertake, accept, receive, get_,
_Bo, VPs_, _etc._: _hold, seize, catch, grasp, pluck up, carry off_,
_Bl_ (eo): _bear, carry, bring_: _betake oneself, go_, _Bo_: _contain_:
_suffer, tolerate_: _give_: (+) _grasp, comprehend_: (+) _take to wife_.
frið +n. _make peace_. hê hine genam _he collected himself, reflected_.
sige n. _gain victory_. on n. _take effect_, #Lcd#. ['_nim_']

-nimend, -nimendnes v. d¯æl-n.

niming f. _action of taking_, _LkL_. ['_nimming_']

nimðe = nymðe

nîol = neowol

nîow- = nêow-

nip? sb. _rope_, GPH 399^451.

+nip _darkness, mist, cloud, obscurity_, Æ. [nîpan]

±nîpan^1 ¶ _to grow dark, obscure_.

+nipful _dark, gloomy_, ES 39·347.

nirewett (nirw-) n. _narrowness_: _narrow place, defile, pass_, AO:
_hardness of breathing_.

nirwan = nearwian

nirwð f. _prison house_, WW 399^5. [nierwan]

nis (_Æ, Bo, VPs_) = ne is (_is not_). ['_nis_']

nisêoða = newesêoða

nîsoden ptc. _newly-boiled_, OEG 326.

nistan (_VPs_), nistian (_SPs_) _to build nests_. ['_nest_']

nistig adj. _fasting_, #Lcd#. [ne, wist]

nist-lan (_PPs_), -lian (_EPs_) (y) _to build nests_. ['_nestle_']

nit- = nyt-

nîten = nîeten

niton (_Bo_) = nyton v. nytan. ['_niten_']

nið n. _abyss_, #Sat# 634?

nîð m. _strife, enmity, attack, war_: _evil, hatred, spite_, _Bl, Cr,
VPs_; AO, CP: _oppression, affliction, trouble, grief_, AO. ['_nith_']

niðan = neoðan

nîðan _to hate_, GD 117^5.

niðas = niððas  [[headword spelled "nîððas"]]

nîðcwalu f. _violent death, destruction_, #Cr# 1258.

nîðcwealm § m. _violent death, destruction_.

nîðdraca m. _hostile dragon_, B 2273.

niðemest v. niðera.

niðer (io, y) adv. _below, beneath_, _Æ, B, Bo_; AO, CP. ['_nether_']

niðera (eo, y) (comp.) adj. niðemest, nyðemest (superl.; positive not
found) _lower, under, lowest_, _Bo, WW_; CP. ['_nether_']

niðerâscûfan (êo^4) _to push down_, Æ.

niðerâstîgan^1 _to descend_, Æ, CP.

niðerâtredan^5 _to tread down, tread under foot_.

niðerbogen ptc. _bent down_, KC 4·72^1.

niðerd¯æl m. _lower part_, #PPs# 138^12.

niðere adv. _below, down, low down_, _Bo_. ['_nether_']

niðerflôr f. _lower story_, GD 170^17.

niðergân (y^1) _to descend_, Æ.

niðergang (y) m. _descent_, #Lcd# 3·246^8.

niðerheald _bent downwards_, #Met# 31^23.

niðerhreosende (y) _falling down_, Æ.

niðerhryre (y^1) m. _downfall, precipitation_, #Sc# 229^12.

±niðerian (e, y) _to depress, abase, bring low, oppress_, _Jud, Lk,
VPs_; AO, CP: _condemn, accuse_. +nyðred _ignominious_, ÆL 23b^14.
['_nither_']

+niðerigendlic (y) _deserving condemnation_, #Sc# 162^18.

niðerlic _low, low-lying, inferior, lowly_, CP.

niðernes (y) f. _deepness, bottom_, BH 212^21.

niðerra = niðera

niðerscêotende (y) _rushing downwards_.

niðerscyfe m. _rushing downwards, descent_, #HGl# 468.

niðersige (y^1) m. _going down_, #LPs#.

niðerstîgan = niðerâstîgan

niðerstige (y^1) m. _descent_.

niðertorfian _to throw down_, GPH 390.

niðerung f. _humiliation, downthrow, condemnation_, _BH_ (y), _OEG_.
['_nither_']

+niðerung f. _abasement_, Æ: _condemnation_, Æ.

niðerweard adj. _directed downwards_. adv. -weardes.

niðeweard _situated beneath, low, nethermost_.

nîðful _envious, quarrelsome, ill-disposed, evil_, _Æ_. ['_nithfull_']

nîðfullîce _maliciously_, ÆH 1·46^25.

nîðgæst ¶ (y^2) m. _hostile alien, fell demon_.

nîðgetêon n. _attack_, #Gen# 2068.

nîðgeweorc n. _evil deed_, B 683.

nîðgrama m. _anger, malice_, W 180^9.

nîðgrim ¶ _fierce, hostile_.

nîðgripe m. _fierce grasp_, B 976? [or ? nýd-]

nîðheard ¶ (and #EPs# 27^4) _bold, brave in battle_.

nîðhell f. _hateful hell_, HL 15^150.

nîðhete ¶ m. _hostility, evil intent_: _affliction, torment_: _foe_,
#An# 833?

nîðhycgende ¶ _evil-scheming_.

nîðhýdig (ê^2) _valorous_, B 3165.

nîðig _envious, malicious_, OEG p. 224n.

nîðing m. _wretch, villain, coward, outlaw_, _Chr, LL_. ['_nithing_']

+nîðla ¶ m. _enemy_: _enmity, fierceness_ (? +nîðle).

nîðlîce adv. _abjectly_, OEG 744.

nîðloca m. _place of torment_, #Hell# 64.

niðor (eo, y) comp. adv. _lower_, Æ, CP.

nîðplega m. _battle, fight_, #An# 414.

niðr- = niðer-

nîðsceaða m. _foe, persecutor_, #Rd# 16^24.

nîðscipe m. _wickedness_, #LPs# 7^10.

nîðsele m. _hall of conflict_, B 1513.

nîðsynn f. _grievovs sin_, #Sat# 180.

nîððas ¶ mpl. _men_.

nîðweorc n. _battle_, ¶#Chr# 973.

nîðwracu ¶ f. _severe punishment_.

nîðwundor § n. _dire wonder, fearful portent_.

nîwan (êo) adv. _newly, lately_, Æ, AO.

nîwanâcenned _new-born_, MH 170^12.

nîwancumen (WW) = nîwcumen

nîwane = nîwan

nîwbacen (nîg-) _newly baked_, Æ.

nîwcend _new born_, BH 144^23 (nîc-).

nîwcilct _newly whitewashed_, AO 286^30.

nîwcumen (nî(g)-) _neophyte_, RB.

nîwe (êo, îe) I. (nîg-, nî-, in compounds) adj. _'new,' fresh, recent,
novel, unheard of, untried, inexperienced_, _Æ, AO, BH, NG, Ph, WW_; CP.
nîwan stefne _again_. II. adv. (_Bl_) = nîwan. ['_new_']

niwel == neowol

nîwerne (ý) _tender_, Æ.

niwesêoða = newesêoða

nîwian _to renew, restore_, _El, Lcd_. ['_new_']

niwiht = nâht

nîwlic (ý) _fresh_. adv. -lîce _lately, recently_, _Æ, AO_. ['_newly_']

nîwlinga (êo) _anew_, GD 266^28.

nîwnes f. _'newness,' novelty_, _BH_ (êo).

niwol = neowol

nîwtyrwed _newly tarred_, B 295.

nîwung f. _rudiment_, OEG 914.

nîwunga (eo) adv. _newly, anew_.

nixtnig = nistig

nô (CP) = nâ

noctern m? n? _nocturn (religious service)_, CM 220^561.

+nôg, +nðh I. adj. _enough, sufficient, abundant_, _An, Bo, RB_; CP:
_much, many_. II. adv. _sufficiently_, _Bo_: _fully, quite, abundantly_,
_Bo_. ['_enough_']

+nôgian _to be abundant_, NC 345.

nôh- = nâh-

nolde v. *nyllan.

nom pret. 3 sg. of niman.

nom-, nome- = nam-

non m. _title of senior monks_, RB.

nôn fn. (m. RB 73^14) _the ninth hour_ (= 3 p.m.), _B, BH, Lcd_: _nones
(service held at the ninth hour)_, _RB, WW_. tô nônes _till three
o'clock_. ['_noon_'; _L._ nona (hora)]

nônbelle f. _noon-bell_.

nôngereord n. _meal after nones, dinner_, RB 74^8.

nônmete m. _afternoon meal_, _Sol, WW_. ['_noonmeat_']

nonne = nunne

nônsang m. _service at 3 p.m., nones_.

nôntîd f. _ninth hour_, _Æ, Bl_. ['_noontide_']

nôntîma m. _ninth hour_.

norð I. adj. comp. norð(er)ra, superl. norðmest _northern_, AO. II. adv.
comp. norðor _northwards_, _Chr, Met_: _in the north, 'north,'_ _AO,
B, Bl_.

norðan adv. _from the north_, AO. be...norðan prep. (w. d.) _north
of_, AO.

norðanêastan adv. _from the north-east, north-easterly_, AO.

norðanêastanwind m. _north-east wind_, WW.

Norðanhymbre, Norðhymbre mp. _Northumbrians_, _Chr_: _Northumbria_.
['_Northumber_']

norðanweard _northward_.

norðanwestan adv. _from the north-west, north-westerly_, AO.

norðanwestanwind m. _north-west wind_, WW 8^10.

norðanwind m. _north wind_.

norðd¯æl m. _north quarter, northern part, north_, _Æ, AO, Chr_.
['_northdeal_']

norðduru f. _north door_, #Bl# 203.

norðêast sbm. and adv. '_north-east_,' _BC, Chr_.

norðêastende m. _north-east end_, AO 14^14.

norðêasthyrne f. _north-east corner_, LV 71.

norðêastlang _extending north-eastwards_, AO.

norðemest = norðmest

norðende m. _northern quarter_.

norðerne '_northern_,' _Northumbrian, Scandinavian_, _Æ, Chr, Met_.

norðerra (_BC, Chr_) comp. adj. v. norð. ['_norther_']

norðeweard adj. _northward, north_, AO.

norðfolc n. _northern folk_: _people of Norfolk_.

norðgem¯ære n. _northern limit_, AO.

norðhealf f. _north side, north_, _AO, Bl_. ['_northhalf_']

norðhere m. _army from the north_, #Chr# 910#a#.

Norðhymbre = (1) Norðanhymbre; (2) Norðhymbrisc

Norðhymbrisc _Northumbrian_, Æ.

norðland n. _northern land or shore_, _AO, Chr_. ['_northland_']

norðlanu f. _north lane_, Ct.

norðlêode mp. _northern folk, Angles_, LL.

norðlic _northern_, WW 361^1.

norðmann m. _dweller in the north, Scandinavian_, _Æ, AO, Chr_.
['_Northman_']

norðmest (_AO, Met_) superl. of norð adj. and adv. ['_northmost_']

norðor (_AO_) v. norð. ['_norther_']

norðportic m. _north porch_, BH 106^2.

norðra v. norð.

norðrodor m. _northern sky_, #Gu# 1253.

norðryhte adv. _direct northwards, due north_, AO 17^9,12.

norðs¯æ f. _northern sea_, '_North Sea_,' _Æ, Chr_.

norðscêata m. _northern point, promontory_, AO 28^3.

norððêod f. _northern people_, BH 50^12.

norððunor m. _thunder from the north_, ES 39·351.

Norð-wêalas, -wâlas mp. _North Welsh (i.e. not Cornish)_: _Wales_.

Norðwêalcynn n. _inhabitants of (North) Wales_, #Chr#.

norðweard adj. and adv. _north, 'northward,'_ _Chr_; AO.

norðweardes adv. '_northwards_,' _Chr_.

norðweg m. _a way leading northwards_, #Ex# 68: _Norway_.

norðwest adv. '_north-west_,' _AO, BC_.

norðwestende m. _north-west end_, AO.

norðwestgem¯ære m. _north-west limit, boundary_, AO 8^31.

norðwind m. _north wind_, WW 378^8.

nôse ¶ f. _ness, promontory_.

nosgrisele = nosugrisle

nosle (_WW_ 153) = nostle

nostle f. _fillet, band_, _CP, WW_. ['_nostel_']

nos-ðîrl, -ðýr(e)l, -terl (_WW_) n. '_nostril_,' _Æ, Lcd_.

nosu f. gds. nosa, nose '_nose_,' _Æ, Chr, CP_.

nosugrisle f. _nose-gristle_.

nôt m. _mark, note_, A 8·333. [_L._ nota]

nôtere m. _one who makes notes, scribe, writer_, OEG 2846. [_L._
notarius]

nôteð¯æshwôn = nâteshwôn

notgeorn _industrious_, W 72^9. [nêotan]

±notian _to enjoy_: _use, employ_, _Bo, RB, WW_; Æ, CP: _discharge an
office_: (+) '_note_,' MtL.

notu f. _enjoyment, use, advantage, utility_, _AO, RB_: _employment,
office, discharge of a duty_, _RB_; CP. ['_note_'; nêotan]

notwrîtere m. _one who makes notes, scribe_, WW 451^35.

nôð ¶ f. _daring, boldness_: _booty, plunder_ (GK), #Whale# 28?

nôðer (_CP_) = nâhwæðer. ['_nother_']

nôwend m. _shipmaster, sailor_, NC 312.

nôwêr = nâhw¯ær

nô-wiht (_CP, VPs_), -wuht, -wyht = nâht. ['_nought_']

nôwðer (_BC_) = nâhwæðer. ['_nouther_']

nû I. adv. _'now,' at present, at this time_, _A, AO, Bl, VPs_; CP:
_very recently_, _A, Bo_: _introducing commands, requests (Bl, Cr, Ps)
and arguments (Æ, Bo, CP)_. nû gên _still_. nû gîet _as yet, still_. nû
ðâ _now, already_, _Æ_ ('_nowthe_'). II. conj. _now that, inasmuch as,
because, since, when_, _Bl, Bo, VPs_; AO, CP. III. interj. _lo! behold!
come!_ Æ. nû lâ _now_.

+nugan* swv. impers. pres. 3 sg. +neah _to suffice, not to lack_.

numen I. pp. of niman. II. '_vulsio_,' MkL p. 2^17 (v. A 16·74).

numol (æ^1, e^2, u^2) _'capax,' holding much, quick at learning_, _ÆGr,
WW_: _'mordax,' quick at seizing_, NC 313. ['_nimble_']

nûna adv. _now_, WW 254^24.

nunf¯æmne f. _nun_, GD 50, 340.

nunhîred m. _nunnery_, TC 232^6.

nunlîf n. _life of a nun_, GD 199^16.

nunmynster, nunnanmynster n. _convent, nunnery_.

nunne f. '_nun_,' _Æ, BH_: _pagan priestess, vestal_, _AO_.

nunscrûd n. _nun's dress_, TC 538^12.

nusêoða = newesêoða

nûðâ v. nû.

nybðe (VHy) = nymðe

+nycled (#Gl#) = +cnycled

nýd I. = nîed. II. = nêod

nýd- = nêad-, nîed-

nýdbebod n. _command_, #Creat# 72.

nýdbe-hôf, -hôflic _needful, necessary_.

nýdboda m. _messenger of evil_? #Ex# 474.

nýdbrice (ê) m. _requirement, need_, ÆH 2·144^31.

nýdbysgu f. _toil, trouble_, #Rim# 44.

nýdbysig _distressed_, #Jul# 423.

nýdcleofa ¶ m. _prison_.

nýdcosting f. _affliction_, #Gu# 1126.

nýdd¯æda m. _one who acts under compulsion_, LL 36[26].

+nýdenlic _compulsory_, BH 62^23#b#.

nýdfara m. _fugitive, exile_, #Ex# 208.

nýdgedâl ¶ n. _forced dissolution, death_.

nýdgenga m. _wretched wanderer_, #Da# 633.

nýdgestealla m. _comrade in need_, B 882.

nýdgewald m. _tyranny_, #Cr# 1451.

nýdgild n. _exaction, tribute_, W 162^11.

nýdgrâp f. (#Rim# 73), nýdgripe m. (B 976) _coercive grip_.

nýdh¯æmestre (ê) f. _mistress, concubine_, OEG 4451.

nýdhelp mf. _help in trouble_, LL (278^2).

±nýd-m¯æg m., -mâge f. _blood-relation, cousin_, LL.

nýdmægen (ê^1) n. _force_, DR 117^13.

nýdn¯æman _to force, ravish_, LL.

nýdnes f. _necessity_, LL (158^10).

nýdnima (ê) m. _one who takes by force_, NG.

nýdniman^3 (êa) _to take by force, abduct_, LL 360[73,2].

nýdnimu (ê) f. _rapine, forcible seizure_.

nýdnimung f. _rapine, abduction_.

nýdriht n. _imperative duty, office_: _due, tribute_.

nýdðêowetling m. _bondslave_, TC 628^13.

nýdðêowigan _to reduce to servitude, exact service from
(an ecclesiastical establishment)_, LL 381[21].

nýdwracu ¶ f. _violence, distress_.

nýdwr¯æclîce _violently_, ÆL 23b^404.

nýdwyrhta m. _involuntary agent_, LL.

+nyhe = +neahhe

nýhst == nîehst

nyht == niht

+nyht fn. _abundance, fulness, sufficiency_, CP. [+nugan]

+nyhtful _abundant, plentiful_, WW 40^34.

+nyhtlîce _abundantly_, WW 3^2.

±nyhtsum _abundant_: (+) _satisfied, contented_, adv. -lîce, #VPs#.

+nyhtsumian _to suffice, abound_, Æ.

+nyhtsumnes f. _abundance, plenty_, #VPs#.

+nyhð (W 196^21) = +nyht?

nyllan* anv. pret. nolde _to be unwilling_, _Æ, B, CP, VPs_; AO:
_refuse, prevent_, _PPs_ 5^3. ['_nill_'; ne, willan]

nyman = niman

-nyme v. fore-n.

nymne = nemne, nefne

nymðe conj. _unless, except_.

+nyp = +nip

nypel m. _trunk (of an elephant)_, Æ (4^286).

nýr = nêar = nêah adv.

nyrgend = nergend

nyrðra = norðerra

±nyrwan, nyrwian _to narrow, curtail, restrict_: _repress, oppress,
constrain_: _blame, threaten_. [v. '_narrow_']

nyrwett = nirewett

nys = nis = ne is  [[form of "wesan"]]

nysse, nyste (_Bo, Bl, VPs_) = ne wisse, ne wiste v. nytan. ['_nist_']

nystlan = nistlan

nyt = (1) nytt; (2) nett

+nýt pres. 3 sg. of +nîedan.

  [[main entry is nîedan without +]]

nytan (e, i) anv. pres. 1, 3 sg. nât, 2 nâst, pl. nyton, pret. nyste,
nysse _not to know, to be ignorant_, Æ, AO, CP. [ne, witan]

nyten _ignorant_, Æ. [ne, witan]

nýten (_Lcd_) == nîeten

nytende adv. _ignorantly_, Æ.

nytendnes = nytennes

nytenlic _ignorant_, Æ.

nytennes (e, i) f. _ignorance, laziness, ignominy_, Æ.

nytlic _useful, profitable_. [_Ger._ nützlich]

nytlicnes f. _utility_, #Lcd# 1·314^8.

nytnes f. _use, benefit, convenience_.

nytt I. f. _use, utility, advantage_, AO, CP: _duty, office,
employment_, B: _supervision, care_, GD 180^28. II. adj. _useful,
beneficial, helpful, profitable_, AO, CP. [nêotan]

nytte = nette

±nyttian _to enjoy, use_, _Lcd_: _eat_. ['_nutte_']

nyttnes = nytnes

nyttol _useful_, #Lcd# 32b.

nyttung (i) f. _profit, advantage_, WW 116^37.

nytu (_MtR_ 7^16) = hnutu

nytun = nyton = ne witon  [[form of "witan"]]

nytweorð- = nytwierð-

nyt-wierðe (CP), -wirðe, -wyrðe (Æ) _useful, profitable_.

nytwierðlic _useful, profitable_. adv. -lîce, CP.

nytwurð-, nytwyrð- = nytwierð-

nytwyrðnes (eo) f. _utility_, WW.

nyðan = neoðan

nyðe-, nyðer- = niðer-, niðr-

nýw- = nîw-

nywel, nywol == neowol

nýxt = nîehst




=O=


o = on

ô (N) = â

ob = of

ob- (K) = of-

obet (_Cp, Ep_) = ofet

obst (Cp 217#e#) = ofost

oc = ac

ôc pret. 3 sg. of acan.

ôcon pret. pl. of acan.

ôcusta m. _armpit_, #Gl#.

ôden ([)o]?) f. _threshing-floor_.  [[i.e. short o?]]

ôdencolc _hollow serving as a threshing-floor_, EC 121^2.

+ôdon = +êodon  [[form of "±gân"]]

oe- = e-, ê-

oeg (N) = woeg = weg

ôeghwêr = ¯æghw¯ær

ôeghwelc (Cp) = ¯æghwilc

oeht- (N) = êht-

oembeht (Cp) = ambiht

oemseten (= ymb-) f. _shoot, slip_? (Swt), _row (of vines)_? (BT), Cp
534#a#.

oexen = exen v. oxa.

of I. prep. w. d. _'of,' from, out of_, _Æ, AO, Bl, G_, _etc._: _among,
concerning, about_, _AO, BH_: _by_, _Chr_, _etc._: _derived from, made
of, belonging to_, _Æ, AO, CP_, _etc._ II. adv. _off, away, absent_,
_Bl, LL, Mt_.

ofâcêapian _to buy off_, LL 122[74].

ofâceorfan^3 _to cut or prune off_, AO, CP.

ofâcsian _to find out by asking, be informed, hear of, learn_, Æ.

ofâdôn anv. _to pull out, tear out_, LL 86[70,74]: _leave out, except_,
LL 182[10].

ofâdrîfan^1 _to hurt, chase, drive_.

ofâdrincan^3 _to drain_, Æ: _quench_, AO.

ofâdrygan _to dry off, wipe off_, CP 71^11.

ofæt = ofet

ofâhêawan^7 _to cut off_, ÆL 29^293.

ofâsceacan^6 _to shake off_, CM 993: _excuse_.

ofâsciran (e, y) _to cut off_, LL 68[35,5].

ofâsêoðan^2 _to purge, purify_, BH 288^9.

ofâslêan^6 _to smite off_, #Chr#.

ofâtêon^2 _to pull out, withdraw_, CP.

ofâxian (Æ) = ofâcsian

ofbêatan^7 _to beat to pieces, beat to death, kill_, AO.

ofblindian _to blind_, JnLR 12^40.

ofcalan^6 _to chill, make or grow cold_, Æ, #Rim# 24?

ofclipian _to obtain by calling, call for_, Æ.

ofcuman^4 _to spring from, be derived from_, Æ.

ofcyrf m. _a section, cutting_, Æ: _amputation_, Æ.

ofdæl _inclined (downwards)_, #Bo# 53^14.

of-dæle, -dele n. _decline, declivity, descent, abyss_, CP.

of-dôn anv. pret. -dyde _to put out, put off, take off (clothes)_.

ofdr¯ædan^7 (but wk. pp. ofdr¯ædd) _to fear, be afraid, terrified_,
Æ, CP.

ofdrîfan = ofâdrîfan

ofdûne adv. _down_, AO, CP.

ofdûneheald adv. _directed downwards_.

ofdûnesettan _to set down_, VHy.

ofdûnestîgan^1 _to descend_, #VPs#.

ofdûne-weard, -weardes adv. _downwards_, GD.

ofdûnrihte _downwards_, MFH 170.

ofearmian _to be pitiful_, #ERSPs# 36^22.

ofearmung f. _compassion_, #BlPs# 102^4.

ofêhtan _to persecute_, #RPs# 43^17.

ofelête = ofl¯æte

ofen m., gs. ofnes _furnace_, _MtLR_: '_oven_,' _Æ_.

ofenan = ufenan

ofenbacen _baked in an oven_, Æ.

ofen-raca m., -racu f. _oven-rake_, WW.

ofer I. prep. [w. d. (rest) and a. (motion)] _'over,' beyond, above,
upon, in, across, past_, _Æ, AO, CP_, _etc._ ofer bæc _backwards, back_:
_throughout_, _BH_: _against, in contravention of, contrary to, beyond_,
AO, BH, #Bl, Chr#: (time) _after, through, during, at the end of_, _AO,
Chr, Lcd_: _more than_: _in addition to, besides, beyond_, _Bo, LL, Mk_.
II. adv. _above, on high_, _PPs_: _to or on the other side_, _AO_: _from
side to side, across_, _AO_: _beyond, above_ (quantity), _A, BH_.

ôfer (o^2) m. (gs. ôfres) _border, margin, edge_: _brink, river-bank,
sea-shore_, _Æ, B, Lcd_; AO. ['_over_'; v. Mdf]

ofer¯æt m. _gluttony, feasting, excess_, _CP_; Æ: _feast_. ['_overeat_']

ofer¯æte _gluttonous_, RB 17^15.

oferâhebban = oferhebban

oferbæcgetêung f. _tetanus_, WW 112^20.

oferbebêodan^2 _to rule_, WW 178^37.

oferbecuman^4 _to come in addition, supervene_, CM 134^1060.

oferbecumendlic _supervening_.

ofer-bêon anv. pres. 3 pl. -sind _to be over, command_, CM 112; WW
178^37.

oferbîdan^1 _to outlast, outlive_, TC. ['_overbide_']

oferbiternes (y^3) f. _excessive bitterness_, _SPs_.
['_overbitterness_']

oferblica m. _surface_, OET 181^44.

oferblîðe _too light-hearted_, CP.

oferbr¯ædan _to spread over, suffuse, be spread over, overshadow, cover
over_, _CP_; Æ. ['_overbrede_']

oferbr¯ædels m. _outside, surface, covering_: _coverlet, veil, garment_,
Æ, CP: _cerecloth_, MF 153.

oferbrâw m. _eye-brow_, #Lcd# 3·188^5. [br¯æw]

oferbrecan^4 _to transgress, violate_, AO.

oferbrêdan = oferbregdan

oferbrêdels (#KGl#) = oferbr¯ædels

oferbregdan^3 _to draw over, cover, overspread_: _be covered over, show
a film over_.

oferbrû f. _eye-brow_, #Gl#.

oferbrycgian _to span as by a bridge_, _Æ_. ['_overbridge_']

ofercæfed _overlaid with ornament_, GPH 394.

oferceald _excessively cold_, _Run_ 11. ['_overcold_']

ofercerr m. _passing over_, MtL 1^11. [cierr]

ofercîdan _to chide sharply_.

ofercîdung f. _chiding, reproof_, #EPs# 149^7.

oferclif n. _steep place, overhanging cliff_, WW 480^2.

oferclimban^3 _to climb over_, _AO_ 134^13. ['_overclimb_']

ofercræft m. _fraud_, LL (166^20).

ofercuman^4 _to overcome, subdue, compel, conquer_, _AO, B, Lcd, WW_;
CP: _obtain, attain, reach, overtake_, _BH, Cp, Jud, WW_. ['_overcome_']

ofercyme m. _arrival_, BH 436^28.

ofercýðan _to outdo by preponderance of oaths_, v. LL 2·689.

oferdôn anv. _to 'overdo,' do to excess_, _Æ_. oferdône ðing _excesses_,
_Æ_.

oferdrenc (Æ) = oferdrync

oferdrencan _to make drunk, intoxicate_, AO, CP.

oferdrîfan^1 _to overcome, defeat, dispense_, _Æ, DR_: _confute_, Æ:
_cover (by drifting sand)_, AO: _outvote_, _LL_. ['_overdrive_']

oferdrinc = oferdrync

oferdrincan^3 _to drink too much, get drunk_, _CP, LL_. ['_overdrink_']

oferdrincere m. _drunkard_, HL 12^95,124.

oferdruncen I. n. _drunkenness_, LL. II. ptc. _drunk_.

oferdruncennes f. _drunkenness, intemperance_, Æ, CP.

oferdrync m. _over-drinking, drunkenness_, _CP_: _revelry, feasting_.
[v. '_overdrink_']

oferdyre n. _lintel_, WW 280^16.

ofere _over, across_, v. LV 8.

oferêaca m. _surplus, overplus, remainder, addition_, _increase_, Æ.

ofereald (y) _very old_, RB 61^12.

oferealdormann m. _chief officer_, BH 264^1 (v.l.).

oferêca = oferêaca

ofereldu (HL 11^60#n#) = oferyldu

oferêt = ofer¯æt

ofer-etol (CP), -eotol, -ettol _gluttonous_.

oferetolnes f. _gluttony_, CP.

oferfær n. _passing over_, NG.

oferfæreld n. _passage, journey over or across_, Æ, AO.

oferf¯æt _too fat_, _WW_. ['_overfat_']

oferfæðman _to envelop, overshadow_.

oferfaran^6 (intr.) _to pass, cross, go over_, _Ps_: (tr.) _traverse, go
through, penetrate_, _Gen, W_; Æ, AO: _come across, meet with,
overtake_: _pass through, withstand, overcome_. ['_overfare_']

oferfeallan^7 _to attack_, #Bl# 203.

oferfeng I. m. _fibula, buckle, clasp_, #Gl#. II. pret. 3 sg. of
oferfôn.

oferfeohtan^3 _to conquer_, CP.

oferfêran _to traverse, cross, pass over or through_, Æ, AO: _come upon,
meet with_.

oferferian _to carry over, transport_, OEG 3680.

oferfêrnes f. _chance of crossing, fordable place_, BH 58^1.

oferfêðre _overloaded_, v. ES 43·312.

oferfil = oferfyll

oferflêdan _to overflow, flood_, #Lcd#.

oferflêde _in flood_, #Lcd#.

oferflêon^2 _to fly over_, Æ: _flee from, yield to_, B 2525.

oferflîtan^1 _to overcome, beat, confute_, AO.

oferflôwan^7 _to flow over, run over, 'overflow,'_ _AO, Lk_.

ofer-flôwednes, -flôwen(d)nes f. _excess, superfluity_.

ofer-flôwend (_RB_), -flôwendlic (#Bk# 18) _superfluous_.
['_overflowing_'] adv. -lîce.

oferflôwnes f. _superfluity_, CP.

oferfôn^7 _to seize, take prisoner_, AO.

oferfrêcednes f. _pressure, oppression_, #V^2Ps# 31^7.

oferfroren _frozen over_, AO.

oferfull _too full_, _LPs_. ['_overfull_']

oferfundennes f. _trial, experiment_, OEG 543.

oferfylgan _to pursue, attack_, CP.

ofer-fyll, -fyllu f. _surfeit, gluttony, excess_, _Bo, Lcd_; Æ, CP.
['_overfyll_']

oferfyllan _to cram_, RB, WW.

oferfylnes f. _surfeit, excess_, GD 339^3.

oferfyrr f. _excessive distance_, AO 24^21. [feorr]

oferg¯ægan _to transgress_, Æ.

oferg¯ægednes f. _transgression_, Æ.

oferg¯ægend m. _transgressor_, ÆL 30^411.

ofer-gân anv., -gangan^7 _to pass over, beyond, across, traverse,
cross_, _Æ, Lcd, VPs_; AO, CP: _transgress_, _MtL_: _overrun, overcome,
overspread, conquer_, _Chr, Ex, Lcd, Rd_; Æ: _come upon, overtake,
seize, attach_, _Æ, An_: _pass off, pass away, end_, _AO, CP_.
['_overgo_,' '_overgang_']

ofergapian _to be forgetful of, neglect_, RB 112^2.

ofergêare _old_, #Lcd# 19a.

ofergeatu f. _oblivion_, #PPs# 128^6.

ofergeatul = ofergitol

ofergedrync n. _excess in drinking_, #Bl# 99^21.

ofergedyre = oferdyre

ofergemet n. _excess_, AS, CP.

ofergêmnes f. _watching for_, NG. [gîeman]

ofergenga m. _traveller_, #Lcd#.

ofergenihtsumian _to superabound_, #Sc# 131^15.

ofergeong (= gang) m. _going across_.

ofergeotan = ofergietan

ofergêotan^2 _to pour upon, suffuse, flood, overwhelm_, Æ.

ofergeotende _forgetful_, BH 114^22. [ofergietan]

ofer-geotol, -geottol == ofergitol

ofergesettan _to set over_, CP, #VPs#.

ofergestondan^6 _to stand over_.

ofergetilian _to overcome_, ÆL 23b^185.

ofergetimbran _to erect_, #Bl# 205.

ofergetol- = ofergitol-

ofergeweorc n. _superstructure_: _sepulchre_, Æ.

ofergewrit n. _superscription, inscription_.

ofergietan^5 _to forget, disregard, neglect_, CP.

ofergîfre _gluttonous_, CP.

ofergildan = ofergyldan

ofergîman _to neglect, disregard_.

ofergitan = ofergietan

ofer-gitol, -gittol (ea, eo, y) _forgetful_.

ofergitolian (e, eo) _to forget_, #JVPs#.

ofergitolnes (e, eo, y) f. _forgetfulness_.

oferglænged _over-adorned_, LL (386^10). [glengan]

oferglîdan^1 _to glide over, traverse, pass over, overshadow_, Æ.

ofergr¯ædig _too covetous_, _W_. ['_overgreedy_']

ofergrôwan^7 _to overgrow_, CP 336^8.

ofergumian _to neglect, disregard_, RB 113^2.

ofergyld _gilt_, Æ.

ofergyldan (i) _to encase, overlay or adorn with gold_, Æ, CP.

ofergylden _overlaid with gold_, LL 460[10].

ofergýman = ofergîman

ofergyrd ptc. _girt_, GPH 394.

ofergytan = ofergietan

ofergytnes f. _oblivion, forgetfulness_.

oferhacele f. _hood_, LL (140^22).

oferhangen _covered_, GD 202^19.

oferhêafod adv. _especially, in particular_, Æ. [_Ger._ überhaupt]

oferhêah _very tall, lofty_, _Run_ 26. ['_overhigh_']

oferhealdan^7 _to put off, neglect_.

oferhealfhêafod n. _crown of the head_, WW 156^11.

oferheargian = oferhergan  [[headword spelled "oferhergean"]]

oferhebban^6 _to pass over, omit, neglect_, _AO, LL_; CP.
['_overheave_']

oferhelian _to cover over, conceal_, _Sc_; CP. ['_overhele_']

oferhelmian _to overshadow_, B 1364.

oferhelung f. _covering, veiling, concealing_, #Sc# 223^5.

oferheortnes f. _vehemence of feeling_, AO 166^20.

oferhergean _to overrun, ravage_, AO.

oferhîdig = oferhygdig

oferhîeran (êo, ý) _to 'overhear,' hear_, _AO_: _disobey, disregard,
neglect_, _AO_.

oferhîernes (ê, î, ý) f. _neglect, disobedience_: _fine for
transgression of law or legal orders (= 'superauditio')_, LL.

oferhigd = oferhygd

oferhige? m. _pride_, #PPs# 87^7. [hyge]

oferhigian _to delude, turn the head of_, B 2766.

oferhîran (AO) = oferhîeran

oferhlæstan _to overload_, AO.

oferhlêapan^7 _to jump over, surmount, overcome_, _BH_: _pass over_,
_Lcd_. ['_overleap_']

oferhlêapend m. _over-leaper_, WW 190^2.

oferhlêoðrian _to surpass in loudness_.

oferhlêoður _failing to hear_, #PPs# 93^9.

oferhlîfan^1 (OEG), oferhlîfian (Æ, CP) _to tower over, overtop, excel,
exceed, surpass_.

oferhlîfung f. _loftiness, sublimity_, #Gl#.

ofer-hlûd, -hlýde _clamorous, noisy_, _WW_. ['_overloud_'] adv. -hlûde.

oferhlýp m. _a jump (over something)_, A 8·308; 316.

oferhlyttrian _to clarify, strain_, #ÆGr# 222^8.

oferhoga m. _despiser, proud man_.

oferhogian _to despise (Bl, Bo)_. ['_overhow_']

oferhogiend m. _despiser_, RB 48^6.

oferhogodnes f. _pride, disdain_, GD 144^3.

oferholt n. _phalanx of shields_, #Ex# 157.

oferhr¯ægan (w. d.) _to tower above_? #Sol# 35.

oferhrêfan _to roof over, cover_.

oferhrêred _overthrown_, WW.

oferhrops _greediness_, WW 102^19.

oferhrýfan = oferhrêfan

oferhrýred = oferhrêred

oferhycgean _to despise_, AO, CP.

oferhýd = oferhygd

oferhýd- = oferhygd-

oferhygd (i) I. fn. _pride, conceit, arrogance_, CP. II. adj. _haughty,
proud_.

oferhygdgian _to be proud_, #CVPs# 9^23.

oferhygdig I. n. _pride_. II. adj. _haughty, proud_.

ofer-hygdiglîce, -hîdlîce, _arrogantly_, NC 313.

oferhygdu f. = oferhygd I.

oferhylmend m. _dissembler_, #PPs# 118^119.

oferhýran = oferhîeran

oferhýre _heedless, neglectful_, LL (244^22).

oferhyrned _having horns above_, #Run# 2.

oferhýrnes f. _heedlessness, neglect, disobedience_, LL.

+oferian _to elevate_, #HGl# 428.

oferîdyllîce _vainly, emptily_, #CPs# 30^7.

ofering f. _superabundance_, #Bo#.

oferlâd f. _'translatio,' solemn removal of the body or relics of a
saint to a shrine_, DR 62^9.

oferl¯ædan _to oppress_, _Bl_. ['_overlead_']

oferl¯æfan _to be left over, remain_, _LkLR_. ['_overleave_']

oferlagu f. _cloak_, #Gl#.

oferlecgan _to place over_, CM 899: _overburden, surfeit_, HL 11^99;
12^73.

oferlêof _very dear_, #Run# 23.

oferlêoran _to pass over, or by_: _transgress, prevaricate_.

oferlêornes f. _transgression_, #CPs# 100^3.

oferlibban _to survive_, _ÆGr, TC_. ['_overlive_']

oferlîce _excessively_, _W_. [v. '_overly_']

oferlifa (y^3) m. _excess_, NC 348.

oferlîfian = oferhlîfian  [[under "oferhlîfan"]]

oferlîhtan _to light upon_, ÆL 23b^558: _excel in brightness_.

oferlîðan^1 _to pass over_.

oferlufu f. _too great love_, _W_. ['_overlove_']

oferlyfa = oferlifa

oferlyftlic _above the air_, NC 314.

ofermæcga ¶ m. _very illustrious being_.

ofermægen ¶ n. _overpowering might_.

ofermæstan _to over-fatten_.

oferm¯æte _excessive, immoderate_, _AO, CP_. ['_overmete_']

oferm¯ætlic _vast_, AO 52^10.

oferm¯æto = ofermêtto

ofermagan swv. _to have greater power, prevail_, #Sc# 97^19.

ofermâðum m. _costly treasure_, B 2993.

ofermearcung f. _superscription_, MkL p 5^1.

ofermêde I. n. _pride_, CP. II. adj. _proud, arrogant_. [môd]

ofermêdla m. _haughtiness, pride_.

ofermêdu (CP) = ofermêtto

ofermete m. _gorging, gluttony_, CP.

ofermêtto f. (often in pl.) _pride_, Æ, AO, CP.

ofermicel _over-much, excessive_, _AO, RB_. ['_overmickle_']

ofermicelnes f. _excess_, #Sc# 13.

ofermôd (1) n. _pride, insolence_, _Gen, Ma_. ['_overmod_'] (2) adj.
_proud, overbearing, insolent_, _Bl_; Æ, CP.

ofer-môdgian (CP), -môdig(i)an _to be proud, arrogant_.

ofermôdgung f. _pride_, CP.

ofermôdig _proud, arrogant_, _Lcd_; AO. [v. '_overmod_']

ofermôdignes f. _pride, haughtiness, arrogance_, _Mk_. [v. '_overmod_']

ofermôdlic _proud, haughty, insolent_, CP. adv. -lîce.

ofermôdnes = ofermôdignes

ofernêod f. _extreme need_, #Bk#, LL.

oferniman^4 (y) _to take away, carry off, seize, ravish_.

ofernôn fn. _afternoon (after 3.0 p.m.)_, WW 175^47.

oferorn = oferarn pret. 3 sg. of oferyrnan.

oferprût _'over-proud,' presumptuous, arrogant, haughty_, _Sc_.

oferprýda m. _excessive pride_.

oferr¯ædan _to read over_, _Æ_: _consider, infer_. ['_overread_']

oferranc _too luxurious_, _W_ 46^1. ['_overrank_']

oferreccan _to confute, convince, convict_, CP.

oferrencu f. _extravagance_, W 46^2.

oferrîcsian _to rule over_, CP 119^19.

oferrîdan^1 _to ride across_, _BH_. ['_override_']

oferrôwan^7 _to row over_, Æ.

ofers¯ælic _on the other side of the sea_, BH 246^3.

ofers¯ælig _excessively happy_, DD 246.

ofers¯ælð f. _excessive pleasure_, #Met# 5^27.

ofers¯æwisc _from across the sea, foreign_.

ofersâwan^7 _to sow over_, Mt 13^25.

oferscêadan^7 _to scatter over, sprinkle over_, #Lcd# 67b.

ofer-sceadian (CP), -sceadewian _to overshadow_.

ofersceatt m. _usury, interest_, MtR 25^27.

oferscêawian _to superintend_, LL.

oferscêawigend m. _overseer, bishop_, LL.

oferscînan^1 _to illuminate_.

oferscûan _to overshadow_.

ofersêam m. _bag_, LkL 12^33.

ofersêcan _to overtax_, B 2686.

ofersegl m. _top-sail_, WW 7^4.

oferseglian _to sail across_, _Mt_. ['_oversail_']

ofersêgon = ofersâwon pret. pl. of ofersêon.

ofersendan _to transmit_, #ÆGr# 172^13.

ofersêocnes f. _great illness_, LL.

oferseolfrian (y) _to cover over with silver_, AO.

ofersêon^5 _to see over, overlook, survey, observe, see_, _Bo_:
_despise, neglect_, _W_. ['_oversee_']

ofersettan _to set over_, #VPs#: _overcome_, GD 347^30.

ofersittan^5 _occupy, possess_, _Bo, VPs_: _forbear, desist, refrain
from_, _Æ, B_. ['_oversit_']

oferslæge = oferslege

ofersl¯æp m. _too much sleep_, #Lcd# 1·342^13.

oferslêan^6 _to subdue, overcome_, RB 32^15.

oferslege n. _lintel_, Æ.

oferslop n. _loose upper garment, surplice, stole_, _Lcd, LkL_.
['_overslop_']

oferslype m. _over-garment, surplice_, Æ.

ofersmêaung f. _too exhaustive consideration_, CP 97^17.

oferspr¯æc f. _loquacity_, CP.

oferspr¯æce _talkative, tattling, tale-bearing_, Æ, CP.

oferspr¯ædan _to overlay, cover_, RB.

oferspreca m. _one who talks too much_, OEG 28^9.

ofersprecan^5 _to say too much, be abusive_.

ofersprêce = oferspr¯æce

ofersprecol _talking too much, tattling, indiscreet_, CP.

ofersprecolnes f. _talkativeness_, CP 308^16.

oferst¯ælan _to confute, convict, convince_, Æ, CP.

oferstæppan^6 _to over-step, cross_: _exceed_.

oferstandan^6 _to come upon_, BH 308^25.

ofersteall m. _opposition_, ÆH 1·534^20.

oferstealla m. _survivor_, MH 210^28.

oferstellan _to jump over_, BH 400^22.

ofersteppan = oferstæppan

oferstîgan^1 _to climb over, mount, scale, surmount, overcome_, _AO_: Æ,
CP: _surpass, excel, exceed_, _BH_; Æ, CP. ['_oversty_']

oferstige m. _astonishment_, ÆL 23^555.

oferstîgendlic _superlative_, #ÆGr# 15^18.

oferstigennes _'extasis,' passing over_, OEG 405.

oferswimman^3 _to swim over or across_, _B_ 2367. ['_overswim_']

oferswingan^3 '_transverberare_'! GD 344^33.

oferswîðan (ý) wv. and sv^1 _to overpower, overcome, conquer, vanquish_,
Æ, AO, CP: _excel, surpass_.

oferswîðe adv. _over-much, excessive_.

oferswîðestre f. '_victrix_,' WW 224^39.

oferswîðnes f. _pressure, distress_, NG.

oferswîðrian _to prevail, conquer_.

oferswîðung f. _pressure, distress_, NG.

oferswôgan^7 _to cover, choke_, #Bl# 203^9.

oferswýðan = oferswîðan

ofersylfrian (AO) = oferseolfrian

ofersýman _to overload, oppress_. [sêam]

ofertæl n. _odd number_, #Lcd# 1·288.

ofert¯æle _superstitious_, #Sc# 218^10.

oferteldan^3 _to cover over_, #Ex# 81.

ofertêon^2 _to draw over, cover_, Æ: _finish_.

ofertogennes f. _the condition of being covered_.

ofertrahtnian _to treat of_, ÆH 1·202^28.

ofertredan _to tread down_, _GPH_. ['_overtread_']

ofertrûwa m. _over-confidence_, _LL_ 180, 8, 7. ['_overtrow_']

ofertrûwian _to trust too much_, CP.

oferðearf f. _great need, extreme distress_.

oferðearfa m. _one in great need_, #Cr# 153.

oferðeccan _to cover over, hide_, Æ.

oferðêon^1,3 _to excel, surpass_, Æ, CP.

oferðoht _thought over, considered_, GD 316^20.

oferðrêawian (â^3) '_increpare_,' #EPs# 67^31.

oferðryccednes (i) f. _pressure, oppression_, #CPs# 31^7.

oferðrymm m. _excessive power_, DD 52.

oferwacian _to watch over_, _Æ_. ['_overwake_']

oferwadan^6 _to wade across_, _AO_ 72^33. ['_overwade_']

oferwealdan^7 _to get the better of_, LL 454[7].

oferwealdend m. _over-lord, ruler_, #El# 1236.

oferweaxan^6 _to overgrow, overspread_, _Æ, Bl_. ['_overwax_']

oferweder n. _storm, tempest_, #Chr# 794#e#.

oferwelig _very rich_, NC 314.

ofer-wennan, -wenian _to be proud, become insolent or presumptuous_.

oferweorc n. _sarcophagus, tomb_, _Æ, OEG_. ['_overwork_']

oferweorpan^3 _to throw over, overthrow_, _CP, Lcd_: _throw down,
assault_, LL 56[11,1]: _cast something over another, sprinkle_:
_stumble_? B 1543. ['_overwarp_']

oferwîgan _to overcome_, #Sol# 299.

oferwillan^7 _to boil down_. [weallan]

oferwinnan^3 _to contend with, overcome, subdue_, _Æ, AO_; CP.
['_overwin_']

oferwintran _to go through the winter_, _WW_. ['_overwinter_']

oferwist f. _gluttony, excess_, CP.

oferwistlic _supersubstantial_, MtL 6^11.

oferwlencan _to be very wealthy_, AO 44^12. [wlanc]

oferwlencu f. _excessive riches_, #Gu# 389.

oferwrecan^5 _to overwhelm_, WW 35^14.

oferwrêon^1,2 _to cover over, conceal, hide_, _VPs_: _clothe_, _Mt_.
['_overwry_']

oferwrîgels n. _covering_, #Gl#.

oferwrit n. _epistle_, MtL p10^1.

oferwyllan = oferwillan

oferwyrcan _to cover over, overlay_, _Sol_; Æ, AO. ['_overwork_']

oferyld (W 147^17) = oferyldu

oferyldu f. _extreme old age_, MFH 170.

oferyrnan^3 _to go or run over_, _Æ, Lcd_: _'overrun', cover over,
overwhelm_, _Æ, BH_: _run past, cross_.

oferýð f. _overwhelming wave_, #SPs# 54^25.

ofesc f. _border_? KC 3·393^10.

ofest = ofost

ofestan = ofstan

ofet, ofett (æ) n. _fruit, legume_, _Gen, WW_. ['_ovet_']

ofetrip? n. _harvest_, ZDPh 36·550.

ofeweard = ufeweard

off¯æran = âf¯æran

offaran^6 _to intercept, overtake, fall upon, attack_, Æ, AO. hindan o.
_to intercept from behind, cut off retreat_, AO.

offeallan^7 _to fall upon, cut off, kill, destroy, end_, _Æ, Chr_; AO:
_fall away from, be lost to_, LL 144[6]. hine offêoll _committed
suicide_, #Chr# 962#a#. ['_offall_']

offellan = offyllan

offêran _to overtake (an enemy)_, Æ.

offerenda m. _psalm or anthem sung during the offertory_, ÆP 168^15; ANS
84·5^29.

offerian _to carry off_, B 1583.

offestre f. _a woman of some unknown calling_? CC 10^22.

offlêogan^3 _to fly away_.

offrian _to 'offer,' sacrifice, bring an oblation_, _Æ, AO, VPs_; CP.
[_L._ offerre]

offringclâð m. _offertory cloth_, NC 314.

offringdagas mpl. _offering days_, OEG 40^23.

offringdisc m. _offering-dish, paten_, Ct.

offringhlâf m. _shew-bread_, Mt 12^4.

offringsang m. _hymn while an offering is made_, ÆH 1·218^9; ÆP 214^23.

offringsceat m. _offering-napkin_, BC 3·366.

offrung f. _presenting to God, oblation, sacrifice_, _Æ, Mt_: _thing
presented, 'offering,'_ _Æ_. [offrung- v. also offring-]

offrunghûs n. _house of sacrifice_, NC 314.

offrungspic n. _sacrificial bacon_, ÆL 25^92.

offyligan _to follow up_, LkLR 1^3.

offyllan _to strike down, destroy, kill_.

of-gân anv., pret. -êode; -gangan^7 _to demand, require, exact, extort_,
_Æ_: _attain, obtain, acquire, gain_, _Æ_: _start from, begin_.
['_ofgo_']

ofgangend-e, -lic _derivative_, #ÆGr#.

ofgefen (Cp) = ofgifen pp. of ofgiefan.

ofgêotan^2 _to moisten, soak, steep_, Æ: _quench_, Æ.

ofgerâd _fitting_, #Bo# 8^8.

ofgestîgnes f. _descent_, MtL p6^1.

ofgiefan^5 (i, y) _to give up, resign, leave, quit, desert_, AO.
[giefan]

ofhabban _to hold back_, Æ.

ofhagian _to be inconvenient_, W.

ofhealdan^7 _to withhold, retain_.

ofhearmian (impers.) _to cause grief_.

ofhende _(out of hand), lost, absent_, #Met# 25^34.

ofhingrian _to be hungry_, _Æ_ (3^551). ['_ofhingered_']

  [[headword in OED is "ofhungered"]]

ofhnîtan _to gore to death_, LL 32[21].

ofhrêosan^2 _to overwhelm, cover over_, Æ: _fall down, fall
headlong_, Æ.

ofhrêowan^2 _to cause or feel pity_, _Æ_. ['_arewe_']

ofhwylfan _to roll up_? ARHy 2^12.

ofirnan^3 _to overtake_, _Æ, Bo_: _tire with running_, Æ. ['_ofrun_']

ofl¯ætan^7 _to let go, lay aside, leave behind_: _let flow_, #Bo# 66^29.

ofl¯æte (â, ê) f. _oblation, offering_, _Ps_: _sacramental wafer_, _Æ,
Lcd_. ['_oflete_'; _L._ oblata]

ofl¯æthlâf m. _sacramental wafer_, GD 343^15.

oflangian _to long_, _Æ_. ['_oflonged_']

oflâte (_VPs_) = ofl¯æte

oflecgan _to lay down_, #PPs# 68^1.

oflêogan^2 _to lie, be false_, #PPs# 17^43.

oflête = ofl¯æte

oflicgan^5 _to overlay (a child)_, _LL_. ['_oflie_']

oflîcian (w. d.) _to displease, be displeasing to_, Æ.

oflinnan^3 _to cease, stop_, #Bl# 247^8.

oflongian = oflangian

oflystan _to fill with desire, please_, _Bo_; Æ. pp. of-lysted, -lyst
_desirous of, pleased with_. ['_oflust_']

ofmanian _to exact (a fine)_, LL.

ofmunan swv. _to remember, recollect_, CP.

ofmyrðrian _to murder_, #Chr# 979#e#.

ofn = ofen

ofnêadian _to obtain by force, extort_, TC 295^22.

ofnet n? _closed vessel_, #Lcd# 11b. [ofn]

ofniman^4 _to fail_, LL (170^6).

ofor = (1) eofor; (2) ufor; (3) ofer

ôfor = ôfer

ofost f. _haste, speed, zeal_, Æ. adv. -lîce. on ofoste, of(e)stum
_speedily, hastily_.

ofr (#Gl#) = hofer

ofr¯æcan _to get through (an ordeal) successfully_, LL 333 col 2.

ôfres gs. of ôfer.

ofrian = offrian

ofrung (AO) = offrung

ofrîdan^1 _to overtake by riding, overtake_, _Æ, Chr_. ['_ofride_']

ofsacan^6 _to deny a charge_, _LL_ 108#b# n. 5. ['_ofsake_']

ofscacan^6 _to shudder_, OEG 4160.

ofsceamian (a) _to put to shame_, _Æ, Bo_. ['_ofshame_']

ofscêotan^2 _to shoot down, hit, kill_, Æ, AO, CP. pp. ofscoten
_elf-struck (of cattle seized with sudden disease)_.

ofscleacnes (#APs# 43^22) = ofslegennes

ofscotian _to shoot dead_, AO.

ofsendan _to send for, summon_, _Chr_ 1048. ['_ofsend_']

ofsêon^5 _to see, behold_, _Æ_. ['_ofsee_']

ofsetenes f. _siege_, WW 458^28.

ofsetnian _to besiege_, NC 349.

ofsettan (æ) _to beset, oppress, afflict_, _Hept, Lcd_; Æ. ['_ofset_']

ofsettung f. _pressure_, #Sc# 143^5.

ofsittan^5 _to press down, repress, oppress_, Æ, CP: _occupy_, _Hept,
Bo_; CP: _hedge in, compass about, besiege_. ['_ofsit_']

ofslêan^6 _to strike off or out, cut off_: _strike down, kill_, _AO, BH,
Lcd_; Æ, CP. ['_ofslay_']

ofslegennes f. _slaughter_, #JRVPs# 43^22.

ofslîtan^6 _to bite (of a serpent)_, Æ.

ofsmorian _to suffocate, strangle_, AO.

ofsnîðan^1 _to cut off, kill_, Æ.

ofspring m. _'offspring,' descendants, posterity_, _Æ, CD_.

ofspyrian _to trace out_, LL 96[17].

ofst = ofost

ofstæppan^6 _to trample upon_, Æ.

ofstan _to hasten_, CM 186.  [[from first edition; see "ofstende"
below]]

ofstandan^6 _to remain, persist, continue_, _Lcd_; Æ: _restore, make
restitution_. ['_ofstand_']

ofstede adv. _immediately_, #Sc# 193^12.

ofstende _hastening_, CM 186.

ofstician _to pierce, stab (to death)_, _transfix_, AO.

ofstig _swift_, GPH 392.

ofstingan^3 _to pierce, stab (to death)_, _AO, Chr_; Æ, CP.
['_ofsting_']

ofstint (= ofstent) pres. 3 sg. of ofstandan.

ofstlîce = ofostlîce  [[form of "ofost"]]

ofstofen _impelled_, #PPs#.

ofstum v. ofost.

ofswelgan^3 _to swallow up_, #Bo# 46^15n.

ofswerian _to abjure, deny on oath_, LL.

ofswingan^3 _to scourge (to death)_, AO 154^8.

oft adv. comp. oftor, superl. oftost _often, frequently_, _CP, G_; Æ.
oftost symle _continually_. o. and gelome _diligently_. ['_oft_']

oftacan^2 _to overtake_, NC 325 (late).

oftalu f. _rejoinder, verdict against a claim_, TC 302^22.

oftêon^2 _to withhold, withdraw_, Æ, CP.

oftfêðre _requiring many journeys to carry_, v. ES 43·312.

ofthr¯æd- = oftr¯æd-

oftige m. _withholding_, LL.

oftorfian _to stone to death_, Æ, AO.

oftr¯æde _often or always available_: _frequent_, #Bo# 136^17.

oftr¯ædlic _frequent_, AO. adv. -lîce, CP.

oftredan^5 _to tread down, trample on, tread to death_, _Æ, AO_.
['_oftread_']

oftsîð m. _frequent occasion_, AO. on oftsîðas _frequently_, #Chr#
979#c#.

oftðwêal n. _frequent washing_, NC 314.

oftyrfan _to stone_, AO 172^28.

ofð¯ænan _to moisten_, #Lcd#.

ofðe _or_, OEG 11^177 and n.

ofðecgan _to destroy_, #Gen# 2002.

ofðefian _to dry up_? ÆL 34^144.

ofðencan _to recall to mind_, CP 349^10.

ofðennan = ofðænnan  [[variant of "ofð¯ænan"]]

ofðincð pres. 3 sg. of ofðyncan.

ofðinen _moist_ (pp. of *ofðînan).

of-ðreccan (#KGl#), -ðriccan = ofðryccan

ofðringan^3 _to throng, press upon_, Æ.

ofðryccan (e, i) _to press, squeeze_, Æ: _oppress, afflict, repress_, Æ:
_occupy forcibly_.

of-ðryccednes, -ðrycnes f. _distress, trouble, oppression_, CP.

ofðryscan _to repress, subdue_, CP.

of-ðrysmian, -ðrysman _to choke, stifle_. [ðrosm]

ofðylman _to choke, suffocate_, NC 314.

ofðyncan (impers.) _to give offence, insult, vex, displease, weary,
grieve_, _Æ, AO, B, Bo, CP, LL_. ['_ofthink_']

ofðyrstan _to suffer from thirst, be thirsty, thirst (for)_, _Hept,
Soul_; Æ. ['_athirst_,' '_ofthirst_']

ofðýstrian _to obscure_, #SPs# 73^21. [ðêostrian]

ofunnan swv. _to begrudge, deny, grudge, envy_, Æ, CP.

ofweard (MFH 170) = æfweard

ofweorpan^3 _to stone (to death)_, _kill by a missile_, Æ, AO.

ofworpian _to kill (by stoning)_, LL.

ofwundrian _to be astonished_, Æ.

ôfýrit (WW 385^39) = âfýred pp. of âfýran.

ôga m. _fear, terror, dread_, Æ: _terrible object_, Æ. [ege]

ôgengel m. _bar, bolt_, WW 459^10.

ô-hilde (e^2, y^2), -heald _sloping, inclined_, #Gl#.

ôhsta = ôcusta

ôht I. ¶ f. _persecution_? _fear_? [cp. _Ger._ acht] II. = âwuht

ohtrip v. ofetrip.

ô-hw¯ær = â-hw¯ær

ô-hwæðer = â-hwæðer

ôhwanon = âhwonan

ôhylde = ôhilde

ôl pret. 3 sg. of alan.

ôl¯æc- = olece-

olbend = olfend

±ôleccan (æ, i) _to soothe, caress, flatter_: _please, charm,
propitiate_, CP. [leccan]

ôleccere, ôlecere m. _flatterer_, CP (i).

ôleccung (æ) f. _soothing, flattery, persuasion, allurement, charm_, CP.

ôlectend m. _flatterer_, Cp 1519. [= ôleccend pres. ptc. of ôleccan]

ôlectung (MFH 170) = ôlehtung

ôlehtung f. _flattery_, MFH 170.

ôlfæt = âlfæt

olfend mf., olfenda m. _camel_, _Bl, Mt_; CP. ['_olfend_'; _L._
elephantem]

olfendmyre f. _she-camel_, Æ.

ôlicc- = ôlecc-

oll n. _contumely, contempt, scorn, insult_, Æ. on oll '_nequicquam_,'
OEG 2000.

ollonc, ollunc, ollung (LWS; A) = andlang

ôlðwong m. _strap_, WW 379^32.

ôlyhtword n. _flattering speech_, #Bl# 99^26. [ôleccan]

ôm m. _rust_, Æ.

om- = am-

ôma? m. ome? f. _a liquid measure_, v. NC 314. [_L._ (h)ama; _Ger._ ohm]

ôman fp. _eruptions of the skin, erysipelas_, #Lcd#. [cp. healsôme]

omb- = amb-

ômcynn n. _corrupt humour_, #Lcd# 31a.

omer (a^1, e^1) _a bird, 'scorellus,'_ #Gl#.

ômian _to become rusty_, #Sc# 196^5.

ômiddan = onmiddan

ômig _rusty, rust-eaten, rust-coloured_: _inflammatory_, #Lcd#.

ômiht _inflammatory_, #Lcd#.

ompella = ampella

ompre = ampre I.

on I. prep. (w. d., instr., and a.) (local, etc.) _'on,' upon, on to_
(but ofer is more common), _up to, among_, _AO, CP, Bo, BH, G_: _in,
into, within_, _Æ, BH, Ps_: (temporal) _in, during, at, on, about_, _Æ,
AO_: _against, towards_, _AO, BH, Mt_: _according to, in accordance
with, in respect to_, _Æ, Bo, Ps_: _for, in exchange for_. II. adv.
_on_, _BH, CP_: _forward, onward_, #An#: _continuously_, _Æ_ (forð on),
on riht _rightly_. on ¯ær adv. _formerly_. on ân _continuously, in
concert_: _at once, forthwith_. III. pres. 3 sg. of unnan. IV. (M) =
ond, and

on- I. often meaningless, and only rarely = prep. on. II. = an-. III.
= un-

onâblâwan^1 _to blow on_, Æ.

onâdôn anv. _to put on_, ÆL 7^156.

on¯æht f. _possession_, #CVPs# 2^8.

on¯ælan _to set fire to, ignite, heat, inspire, incite, inflame, burn,
consume_, _Chr_ (an-), _Gen, Sol_; Æ, CP. ['_anneal(ed)_']

on¯ælend m. '_incensor_,' GPH 399.

on¯ælet n. _lightning_, #LPs# 143^6.

on¯ær adv. _formerly_. [on]

onæðele (w. d.) _natural to_, #Met# 13^51.

onâhebban^6 _to lift up, exalt_, CP 56^19.

onâl n. _burning_: _incense, what is burnt_.

onârîsan^1 _to rise up (against)_, #ERPs#.

onarn pret. 3 sg. of oniernan.

onâsâwan^7 _to implant, instil_, MFH 170.

onâscunung = onscunung

onâsendan _to send into, implant in, impart to_, CM 203.

onâsendednes (¯æ) f. '_immissio_,' #LPs# 77^49.

onâsetednes f. _a laying on (of hands)_, NC 349.

onâsettan _to set upon, place on, impress upon_, Æ, CM.

onâswêgan _to sound forth_, #LPs# 28^3.

onâwinnan^3 _to fight against_, #LPs# 34^1; 55^2.

onbæc adv. _backwards, back, behind_.

onbæcling (e) adv. _backward, behind_. o. gewend _having one's back
turned_, Æ.

onbærnan _to kindle, ignite, heat, excite, inspire, inflame, burn_,
AO, CP.

on-bærning (#JPs# 65^15), -bærnes (#SPs#) f. _incense_.

onb¯æru f. _self-restraint_? #Gu# 1027.

onbâsnung f. _expectation_, DR 4^34.

onbeblâwan^1 _to blow upon_, #LPs# 104^19.

onbecling (#EPs#) = onbæcling

onbecuman = oncuman

onbêgan = onbîgan

onbêgnes f. _bending, curvature_, WW. [bêgan, bîegan]

onbeht = ambiht

onbel¯ædan _to inflict upon_, WW 90.

onbên f. _imprecation_, BH 104^3.

onbêodan^2 _to command, order_, AO: _announce, proclaim_, Æ, AO.

onbeornan^3 _to set fire to, inflame_.

onbêotend _threatening, impending_.

onberan^4 _to carry off, plunder_: _diminish, weaken_.

onbergan = onbyrgan

onbescêawung f. _inspection, examination_, #Sc# 66^10.

onbescêofan^2 _to thrust out_, WW 220^19,21.

onbest¯ælan _to convict of crime_, LL 30 [15].

onbestingan = inbestingan

onbid == anbid

onbîdan^1 _to remain, wait_: w. g. _wait for, await, expect_: _attend
upon, wait on_.

onbîgan (ê) _to subdue, subjugate_.

onbiht = ambiht

onbindan^3 _to unbind, untie, loosen_: _disclose_.

onbirgan = onbyrgan

onbîtan^1 (w. g.) _to taste of, partake of, feed upon_.

onbl¯æst m. _'impetus,' onrush, attack_, EHy 5^8.

onbl¯æstan _to break in_, WW 428^1.

onblandan^3 _to mingle_, #An# 675.

onblâwan^7 _to blow into, inspire_: _puff up_.

onblâwing f. _breathing upon_, JnL p 8^6 (in-).

onblâwnes f. _inspiration_, #Bl# 7^26.

onblinnan (MFH 118) = âblinnan

onblôtan^4 _to sacrifice, kill a victim_, #Gen# 2933.

onbran = onbarn pret. 3 sg. of onbeornan.

onbrecan^4 _to burst upon, attack, destroy_.

on-bregdan, -brêdan^3 _to move, bow, start up_: _burst open_.

onbring m. _instigation_, LL.

onbringelle f. _instigation_, ÆL 23b^291.

onbrosnung f. _decay, corruption_, #EPs# 29^10.

onbryce m. _inroad_, OEG 2480.

onbryrdan (âb-, inb-) _to excite, inspire, incite, encourage_, Æ, CP.
onbryrd _excited, fired, ardent_: _contrite_. [brord]

onbryrding f. _incitement_, WW 419^42.

onbryrdnes (e^2) f. _inspiration, incitement, ardour_, Æ: _remorse,
contrition_.

onbûgan^2,1 _to bend_: _bow, submit, yield, to agree with_, _Bl, Mt_; Æ,
AO: _bend aside, deviate_. ['_onbow_']

onbûtan prep. (w. d. a.) and adv. _about, round about_: _round, around_.
adv. phr. west o. faran _to go west about_.

onbyhtscealc = ambihtscealc

onbyrdan = anbyrdan

onbyrgan I. (e, i) _to taste, eat_, Æ. II. _to be surety_, v. OEG 7^99.

onbyrging f. _tasting_, #Lcd# 1·136^12.

onbyrhtan _to illuminate_, #Bl# 105^31.

onbyrignes f. _tasting_, #Bl# 209^12.

onceig- (N) = oncîg-

oncennan _to bear, bring forth_, Æ.

oncer = ancor

oncerran = oncirran

oncîgan (ei^2) _to call upon, invoke_, DR.

oncîgnes, oncîgung (ei) f. _invocation_, DR.

oncirran (e, y) _to turn, alter, change, transform_: _turn off or away,
avert, prevent_: _turn oneself, go_.

onclêow = anclêow

onclifian (eo, y) _to adhere, stick to, persist in_.

onclyfiende _sticking to, tenacious_, Ct.

onclypian _to call upon_, Æ.

on-cn¯æwe, -cnâwe _known, recognised_.

oncnâwan^7 _to understand, know, perceive, observe_, _Ma_; Æ, CP:
_acknowledge, confess, disclose_, _Æ_. ['_acknow_']

on-cnâwennes (Æ), -cnâwnes (CP) f. _acknowledgment, knowledge_.

oncnyssan _to cast down, afflict_, #CPVPs#.

oncnyttan = uncnyttan

oncor = ancor

ôncra = âncra

oncuman^4 _to come upon, befal_.

oncunnan swv. _to know_, #Gl#: _reproach, blame, accuse_, CP.

oncunnes f. _accusation_, #JVPs#; BH 212^15.

oncunning f. _accusation_, BH 212^15 (#b#).

oncwealdan _to slay_, #EPs# 61^4.

oncweðan^5 _to answer, resound, echo_, Æ: _protest_.

oncyrran = oncirran

oncýðan _to make known_.

oncýðd¯æd f. _hurtful deed_, #An# 1181.

oncýðig (#El# 725) = uncýðig?

oncýðð ¶ f. _pain, distress of mind_.

ond == and

ond¯ælan _to infuse_, DR.

ond¯ælend m. _one who imparts, infuser_.

onde- = ande-

onder- = under-

onderslic, ondeslic (DR) = ondrysenlic

ondesn, ondesnes f. _fear_, DR.

ondgit = andgiet

ondlêan = andlêan

ondliota = ondwleota, andwlita  [["ondwleota" redirected to "andwlita"]]

ondlong = andlang

ondo (NG) = anda

ondôn anv. (1) _to undo, open_ [= un-]: (2) _to put on (clothes)_, CM
390; #Sc# 83^6. [= ondôn]

ondôung f. _injection_, #Lcd# 97b.

on-dr¯ædan^7 (and wv.) pret. 3 sg. -drêd, -dr¯æd, -dreord (A), also
-dr¯ædde, pp. -dr¯æd (tr.) _to dread, fear_, _B, Chr, Mt_: (refl.) _be
afraid_, _El, Lk_. ['_adread_']

ondr¯ædendlic _fearful, terrible_, Æ.

ondr¯æding f. _dread, fear, terror_, AO.

ondrencan _to intoxicate_, #Guth# 62^20.

ondresn = ondrysnu

ondrincan^3 (w. g.) _to drink_, BH.

ondrislic = ondrysenlic

ondruncnian _to become intoxicated_, #EPs# 35^9.

on-drysenlic, -drys(n)lic _terrible_.

ondrysne _terrible_: _feared, venerated, venerable_.

ondrysnlic = ondrysenlic

ondrysnu = andrysno

ondrystlic = ondrysenlic

onds- = ands-

ondw- = andw-

one = ono

onealdian _to grow old_, #SPs# 31^3.

oneardian _to inhabit_, #CSPs#.

oneardiend _inhabitant, indweller_, GD, #PPs#.

onefen, onefn = onemn

on-êgan, -êgnan (oe) _to fear, dread_. [ôga]

onemn I. prep. (w. d.) _abreast of, alongside of, by, near, during_, AO.
II. adv. _together, exactly, directly_. o. ð¯æm _at the same time_.

onemnðrôwigan _to sympathize_, ÆL 23b^243.

onerian _to plough up_, Æ, CP.

onerning f. _attack_, DR 36^1. [iernan]

ônettan _to hasten, hurry forward, be quick_, Æ: _be busy, brisk_:
_anticipate_, Æ, CP.

ônettung f. _precipitation_, CP 455^15.

oneða ¶ = anda

onêðgung f. _breathing on_, #ERPs# 17^16.

onfægnian _to fawn on_, #Bo# 102^15.

onfæreld n. _going on, progress, journey_: _going in, entrance_:
_attack, assault, incursion_, #Sc# 212^5.

onfæstnian _to pierce_.

onfæðmnes f. _embrace_, #Bl# 7^26.

onfangend m. _receiver_, ES 9·37.

onfangennes f. _reception, acceptance_, Æ.

onfealdan^7 _to unfold_.

onfeall (e) m. _swelling_, _Lcd_. ['_onfall_']

onfeallende ptc. _rushing on_.

onfehtan (#VPs#) = onfeohtan

onfell = onfeall

onfeng I. = (+) andfeng. II. pret. 3 sg. of onfôn.

±onfeng- = andfeng-

onfeohtan^3 (e) _to attack, assault, fight with_, #Chr#.

onfillende ptc. _falling upon, overwhelming_, WW 420^19.

onfilte (WW) = anfilte  [[under "anfilt"]]

onfindan^3 (but occl. wk. pret. onfunde) _to find out, learn, perceive,
feel, notice, observe, discover_, CP: _experience, suffer_.

onfindend m. _discoverer_, GPH 391.

onfl¯æscnes f. _incarnation_, #Bl# 81^29; BHy 2^41.

onflyge m., onflygen n. _infectious disease_ (BT), #Lcd#.

onfôn^7 _to take, receive, accept_, _BH, Lcd, Mt_; Æ: _stand sponsor_,
#Chr#: _harbour, favour unrighteously_, LL: _undertake, engage in_,
_Bl_. onfangenum gebede _after engaging in prayer_: _begin_: _conceive_,
_Ps_. ['_onfang_']

onfônd m. _undertaker, supporter_.

onfôndlic (an-) '_accipendus_,' NC 314.

onfongenes = onfangennes

onforan I. prep. _before_ (time), _at the beginning of_, _Chr_. II. adv.
_before, in front of_, _Ps_. ['_afore_']

onfordôn ptc. _destroyed_, #LPs# 101^21.

onforeweard-um, -an adv. _in front, in the first line, in the fore part,
above all_, Æ; A 5·455.

onforht = anforht

onforhtian _to be afraid, fear_.

onforwyrd n. _destruction_, #CSPs#.

onfundelnes f. _experience_, #Lcd#.

onfundennes f. _explanation_: _trial, experiment, experience_.

onga = anga

ongægn, ong¯æn = ongêan

ongalan^6 _to charm_.

ongalend m. _enchanter_, #BlPs# 57^6.

ongalnes f. _song_, #BRPs# 70^6.

ongân I. = ongêan. II. anv. _to approach, enter into_, ES 38^20:
_attack_, ES 41·325.

ongang m. _entrance, incursion, assault, attack_.

ongangan^7 = ongân

onge = enge

on-gêan (â, ê), -geagn (æ, e) I. prep. _towards, against, opposite to,
contrary to_, _Æ, Lk_; AO, CP: _against, in exchange for_. II. adv.
_opposite, back_, _Æ, Chr, Ct, Lk_: '_again_.' eft o. _back again_.
o. ðæt _on the other hand, on the contrary_.

ongêancyme m. _return_, Æ.

ongêancyrrendlic _relative_, #ÆGr# 231^17.

ongêanfealdan^7 _to fold back, roll back_, #Sc# 148^11.

ongêanfêran (agêan-) _to return_.

ongêanflôwende _ebbing and flowing_, v. OEG 2363.

ongêanhworfennes f. _turning again_, OEG 2713.

ongêanhwyrf (ag-) m. _return_.

ongêanhwyrfan (ag-) _to turn again, return_.

ongêanlecgan _to lay up, store up_, #Sc# 156^6.

ongêansprecan^5 _to speak against, revile_, #RSPs# 43^17.

ongêanweard _going back or towards_, AO: _near_, #Bk# 4. adv.
-weardes, Æ.

ongêanweardlic _adversative_. adv. -lîce, #ÆGr#.

ongêanwerian _to revile in return_, RB 17^13. [wyrigan]
  [[redirected to "wyrgan"]]

ongêanwiðerian _to oppose_, #Sc# 33^20.

ongêanwyrdnes f. _opposition_, OEG 3975.

ongeboren _in-born_, OEG.

ongebrecan^4 _to attack, ravage_.

ongebringan _to bring upon_: _impose_, CM 36: _enjoin_, CM 1185:
_incline, induce_, ÆL 25^549.

ongecîgan _to call upon, invoke_, RHy 1^4.

ongecîgung (ei^3) f. _invocation_, DR 99^13.

ongecoplîce = ungecoplîce

ongefæstnian = onfæstnian

ongefeht n. _attack_, DR. [feoht]

ongeflogen _attacked by disease_, #Lcd# 1·86^21. [cp. onflygen]
  [[under "onflyge"]]

on-gegen, -gegn = ongêan

ongehrêosan^2 _to rush upon, fall upon_.

ongehrînan^1 _to touch_.

ongehýðnes f. _advantage, profit_, LL 476[12].

ongel, Ongel = angel I., Angel

ongel¯ædan = ingel¯ædan

ongelihtan (AS 2^2) = onlihtan  [[headword spelled "onlîhtan"]]

on-gemang, -gemong prep. (w. d.) and adv. _among, during_, CP:
_meanwhile_, CM. o. ðisum, ð¯æm _meanwhile_.

ongemet = ungemet

ongên, ongend = ongêan

ongen¯æman _to take away (from)_, #Guth# 14^11.

ongeniman^4 _to take away_.

ongeotan = ongietan

ongêotung f. _pouring in_, #Lcd# 88a.

on-gerwan, pp. -gered (#VPs#) = ongirwan

ongesêon = onsêon

ongesetenes f. _knowledge_, BB 474^15.

ongeslêan^6 _to slay_, BH 44^17.

ongespanan^1 _to draw on, allure_, WW 421^22.

onget- = ongiet-

onget¯æcan _to enjoin_, CM 363.

ongetimbran _to build up_, AO.

ongeðw¯ære = ungeðw¯ære

ongewinn n. _assault_, #Sc# 33^17.

ongewiss = ungewiss

ongewrigennes (GD 139^1) = onwrigennes

ongieldan^3 (i) _to atone for, be punished for, pay (the penalty) for_,
AO: _pay, offer (gifts, sacrifice)_. [_Ger._ entgelten]

ongien = onginn

ongierwan (AS 59^20) = ongirwan

ongietan^5 (e, eo, i, y) _to grasp, seize_: _understand, learn,
recognize, know, distinguish, judge, consider_, _Mt_ (y); AO, CP: _see,
perceive_: _perceive by hearing, hear_: _feel, experience_: _know
carnally_: _get, take away_ (âg-). ['_anget_']

ongietenes f. _knowledge, understanding_: _meaning_.

ongifan^5 (æ) _to give back_, Æ: _forgive_.

ongildan = ongieldan

onginn = anginn

onginnan^3 _to begin, attempt, endeavour, try hard_, _Æ, G_; AO, CP.
(This vb. is often used periphrastically w. another vb. in the inf., to
denote the simple action of the latter. The compound is best translated
by the historical aorist of the second vb.): _attack, assail_: _act_
(âg-). ['_ongin_']

onginnendlic _inchoative_, #ÆGr#.

onginnes f. _undertaking_.

on-girwan pret. -girede I. _to unclothe, divest, strip_. [= ungierwan]
II. _to clothe_, #EPs# 131^16.

ongit = andgiet

ongit- = ongiet-

Ongle (AO) = Angle

Onglisc = Englisc

ongnora? ongnere = angnere

Ongol = Angel

ongong = ongang

ongris-, ongrys- = angris-

ongrype m. _attack_, W 187^2.

ongryrelic _horrible_, #Guth# 36^24.

ongseta = angseta  [[under "angset"]]

ongunnenes = onginnes

ongy- = ongi-

ongyrdan _to unbuckle, unfasten_, BH 196^28.

ongyrnan _to impose, inflict on_, #Sc# 10^4.

ongytan = ongietan

onhâdian _to unfrock, divest of holy orders_, LL 66[21].

onh¯ældan (#VPs#) = onhieldan

onh¯æle ¶ _secret, concealed, hidden_.

onh¯ætan _to heat, inflame_, AO, CP.

onhagian (impers.) _to be possible or convenient, be fitting, suit,
please_, Æ, CP: _be at leisure_.

onhâtan^1 ¶ _to promise_.

onhâtian _to become hot_, WW.

onhâwian _to behold_, ÆL 3^261.

onhealdan^7 (an-) _to keep (peace)_, #Met# 11^42.

onhêaw m. _trunk of tree, block of wood for hewing on_, WW.

onhebban^6 (occl. wk. pret. onhefde) _to raise up, erect, lift up,
exalt_, Æ: _leaven_: _begin_: _take away_.

onhefednes (an-) f. _exaltation_, RB 23^2.

onheld- = onhield-

onhergian _to waste, ravage_, BH.

onheri- = onhyri-

onhetting f. _persecution_, OEG 2^130.

onhicgan = onhycgan

onhieldan (CP) (i^2) _to bend, bend down, lean, recline, incline_:
_decline, sink_.

onhieldednes (e^2, y^2) f. _declining_, #CVPs# 72^4.

onhierwan (u^1, y^2) _to deride, blaspheme_, W 70^15#c#.

onhigian _to despoil_, OEG.

onhigiend m. _despoiler_, OEG 2209.

onhindan, onhinder adv. _behind, backward_.

onhinderling adv. _back_, #PPs#.

onhîscan = onhýscan

onhlîdan^1 _to open, reveal, unclose_: _appear_.

onhlinian _to lean on_, #Gl#.

onhnîgan^1 _to bend down, bow, worship_.

onhôhsnian _to detest_? (BT) _hamstring, cripple, check_? (Bugge), B
1944.

onhôn^7 _to hang, crucify_.

onhrægl n. _covering, wrap_, #HGl# 490.

onhr¯æran = onhrêran

onhr¯æs = onr¯æs

onhrêodan^2 _to adorn_ (or ? onrêodan = _redden_) #Gen# 2931.

onhrêosan^2 _to fall upon, rush upon_.

onhrêran _to move, disturb, agitate, arouse, excite_, CP.

onhrînan^1 (w. g. or d.) _to touch, lay hold of_, CP.

onhrine m. _touch, contact_, #Lcd# 1·328^1.

onhrôp m. _importunity_, Æ.

onhupian _to step back, retire_, CP 441^28.

onhwelan^4 _to bellow back, resound_, WW 528^39.

onhweorfan^3 _to change, turn, reverse_, CP.

onhwerfan (y^2) _to turn, change, turn round_.

onhwerfednes (æ) f. _change_, AS 9^5.

onhycgan _to consider_, #Da# 473 (i).

onhyldan = onhieldan

onhyrdan ¶ _to strengthen, encourage_. [heard]

onhyrenes f. _imitation_, CP.

onhyrgend m. _emulator, imitator_, WW.

onhyrian (e) _to emulate, imitate_, CP.

onhyring f. _emulation, imitation, zeal_, Æ, CP.

onhýrsumian _to be busied with, occupied in_, RB 71^17.

onhýscan (î) _to mock at, vilify, reproach_: _detest_: _deceive_. [hûsc]

oniernan^3 (¶) _to give way, open (of a door)_: '_currere_,' #BPs#
118^32: '_incurrere_,' LL 410[3,5].

oninnan prep. (w. d.) and adv. _within, into, among_.

onl¯æc (Cp 1725) = onlêac, pret. 3 sg. of onlûcan.

onlæc-can, -san _to vex_, #EPs#.

onlæccung (e^2) f. '_irrita_,' #EPs#.

onl¯ædan = inl¯ædan

onl¯ænan _to lend, grant, let, lease_, CP.

onl¯æpnes (BH 128^23) = ânlîpnes

onl¯ætan _to relax, loosen, let go, permit_.

onlang = andlang

onlêc = anlêc

onlec- = onlæc-

onlecgende _(salve) to be applied_, #Lcd#.

onlegen f. _poultice_, #Lcd#.

onlêogan^2 _to misrepresent_, #Bo#.

onlêoht- = onlîht-

onlêon^1 _to lend, grant, give_.

onlêoðian = onlîðigan

onlês- = onlîes-

onlic (an-) _like, resembling, similar_, _Mt_; CP. adv. -lîce, AO, CP.
['_anlike_']

onlicgan^5 _to lay on_.

+onlîcian (an-; -lîcan, GD 75^4) _to compare_: _make like_.

onlîcnes f. _resemblance, likeness, similitude_, _Gen_: _picture, image,
idol_, _WW_; AO, CP: _parable_: _stature, form_. ['_anlikeness_']

+onlîcung (an-) f. _likeness_, NC 270.

onlîesan (ê, ý) _to loosen, set free, release_, CP.

onlîesednes (î^2) f. _remission (of sins)_, AHy 9^77.

onlîesend (ý) m. _liberator_, #CPs# 39^18.

onlîesnes (ê) f. _deliverance_.

onlîgan (in-) _to inflame_, #Ps#.

onlîhtan (êo, ý) _to illuminate, give light to, enlighten_, _Bl, Bo_;
CP: _restore to sight_: _shine_. ['_onlight_']

onlîhtednes = onlîhtnes

onlîhting f. _illumination, enlightenment_, Æ.

onlîhtnes f. _illumination_.

onlîðigan (intr.) _to become pliant, yield_: (tr.) _loosen, untie_.

onlôcian _to look on, behold_, Æ, CP.

onlôciend m. _onlooker, spectator_, Æ.

onlong = andlang

onlûcan^2 (= un-) _to unlock, open, unfold, reveal, disclose_, CP.

onlûtan^2 _to bow, incline, bend down_, CP.

onlûtung f. '_involucrum_,' GPH 402.

onlý- = onlî-

onlýs- = onlîes-

onm¯ædla = onmêdla

onm¯ælan _to speak to_, #Da# 210.

onmang (Æ) = ongemang

onmearca m. _inscription_, MkL 12^16 (MkR in-).

onmearcung f. _inscription_, NG (e^2).

onmêdan _to presume, take upon oneself_, #Rd# 56^15?

onmêdla = anmêdla

onmeltan^3? _to soften_, #PPs# 88^38.

onmêtan I. _to paint, cover over_? #PPs# 88^46. II. _to come upon, find
out_, #EPs# 114^3.

onmiddan prep. (w. d.) _amid, in the midst, at the middle of_, Æ.

onmitta = anmitta

onmôd = anmôd

onmunan swv. pres. 3 sg. onman, pret. onmunde _to esteem, think worthy
of, consider entitled to_, CP: refl. _care for, wish_: _remind_, B 2640.

onmyrran _to mar, disturb_, Ct.

onn = ann, pres. 3 sg. of unnan.

onnhîgan (WW 255^11) = onhnîgan

onniman^4 _to receive, take_, #PPs#.

onnytt = unnytt  [[under "unnyt"]]

ono I. interj. _lo! behold!_ II. = heonu

onoeðung (#VPs#) = oneðung  [[variant of "onêðgung"?]]

onôrettan ¶ _to perform with effort, accomplish_.

onorðung f. _inspiration, inbreathing_.

onoða (WW) = anda

onpennian _to open_, CP 277^8.

onrâd f. _riding on horseback_, #Lcd#.

onræfniendlic = unræfniendlic

onr¯æs m. _onrush, impetus, assault, attack_, Æ, CP.

onr¯æsan I. _to rush (on)_, _VPs_. ['_onrese_'] II. nap. of wk. sb.
_irruptions_, WW.

onred m. _name of a plant_, #Lcd#.

onrêodan v. onhrêodan.

onrettan = ôrettan

onrid n. _riding horse_, CC.

onrîdan^1 _to ride (on a raid, etc.)_, #Chr# 871#a#.

onriht _right, lawful, proper_: _partaking of_? #Ex# 35^8. adv. AS 13^8.
also -lîce, #Bl# 43^16.

onrihtwîsnes = unrihtwîsnes

onrîptîd f. _harvest-time_, ES 39·352.

onrîsan (_Æ_) = ârîsan. ['_onrise_']

onryne m. _running on, course_: _incursion, attack, assault_.

onsacan^6 _to contest, dispute, strive against, resist, repel_: (¶)
_attack_: _refuse, deny, contradict_: _exculpate, excuse oneself_.

onsæc I. _denying_: _excused_. II. (LL 24[41] Ld) = andsæc

onsægan ¶ _to prostrate_.

onsægd- = onsæged-

ons¯æge _assailing, attacking_. [sîgan]

onsægednes (e) f. _sacrifice, offering_, Æ: _oblation_, _(sacrificial)
victim_.

onsægnes f. _holocaust, sacrifice_, #BlPs# 65^15.

onsægung f. _sacrifice_, WW.

ons¯ælan _to untie, loosen_.

onsæt I. pret. 3 sg. of onsittan. II. = onset

onsagu f. _affirmation, accusation, reproach_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_onsaw_']

onsand f. _sending against_, _VPs_. ['_onsand_']

onsang m. _incantation_, GD 73^26.

onsâwan^7 _to sow_: _introduce into, implant_, CM 658.

onsceacan^6 (a) _to shake, shake off, remove_.

onsceacnes f. _excuse_, #EPs#. [= onsacnes, Swt]

onsceamian = ofsceamian

onsceon- = onscun-

onsceortian _to grow short_, MH 104^23.

onscêotan^2 (un-) _to cut up, open, eviscerate_.

onscillan (= y^2) _to give back a sound, reply_, OEG 8^265.

onscôgan _to unshoe_. pp. onscôd _unshod_.

onscrýdan _to clothe_, #EPs, Sc#.

onscunian (eo, y) _to shun, avoid, fear, detest, hate_, _LL_; Æ, CP:
_put away, reject, despise_: _irritate_. ['_ashun_']

on-scuniendlic (CP), -scunigendlic (Æ) _hateful, detestable_.

onscunigend m. _hater_, #Bl# 111^29.

onscunung f. _execration, abomination_: _exasperation_.

onscynian = onscunian

onscyte m. _attack, assault_: _defamation, calumny_.

onseacan (Cp 665) = onsceacan

onsêcan _require, exact_, _Jul_. ['_onseek_']

onsecgan _to renounce, deny_: _offer sacrifice_, AO: _impute_, Æ:
_inform_, Æ.

onsêgednes = ons¯ægednes  [[headword spelled "onsægednes"]]

onsên (#VPs#) = ansîen

onsendan _to send out, send forth, transmit, yield up_, AO, CP.

onsêon I. (sv^5) _to see, look on, behold, regard, take notice of_, AO.
II. (A) = ansîen

on-set, -setl, n. _a sitting on, riding on_, GD 183.

onsetenes f. _laying on (of hands)_, MH 84^2.

onsetnes I. f. _constitution, founding_. II. f. _snare_, DR 121^19.
[sittan]

onsetnung f. _snare_, DR 147^7.

onsettan _to impose, oppress, bear down_.

onsîcan^1 _to sigh, groan_, #Bo#.

onsîen = ansîen

onsîgan^1 _to sink, decline, descend_: _approach, impend_, Æ:
_assail_, Æ.

onsit = onset

onsittan I. sv^5 _to seat oneself in, occupy_, Æ: _oppress_. II. sv^5
_to fear, dread_ (= ond-).

onsittend m. _rider_, CHy 4^1.

onslæge m. _blow_, WW. [slege]

onsl¯æpan^7 and wv. _to go to sleep_, _sleep_, BH.

onslâpan = onsl¯æpan

onslûpan^7 _to become loose_, W 83.

onslýpan _to loosen_.

onsn¯æsan (LL 69[36]) v. sn¯æsan.

onsnîðan^1 _to cut up_, #Lcd# (ES 43·321).

onsond = onsand

onsp¯æc f. _imputation, charge, claim_.

onspannan^7 _to unfasten, unbind, unloose, open, disclose, release_.

onspeca m. _accuser, claimant_, LL 138[1,3].

onspecend m. _accuser_, TC 169^17.

onspornan = onspurnan

onspornend (= un-) _not stumbling_, #Sc# 187^8.

onspr¯æc f. _speech, discourse_, GD 332^9 (an-).

onsprecan^5 _to accuse_: _address_.

onspreccan _to enliven_, #Rim# 9?

onspringan^3 _to spring forth, originate, rise, burst forth, burst
asunder_.

onsprungennes f. _eclipse_, WW 225^39.

onspurnan^3 _to strike against, stumble_.

onstæl m. _order, arrangement_, #Gu# 796.

onst¯ælan _to impute to, accuse of_, MFH 170.

onstæpe (e) m. _ingress_, #ESPs# 67^26.

onstæppan^6 _to walk, go_.

onstal (= ea?) m. _provision, supply_, CP 4^1.

onstâl m? _charge, reproof_, OEG.

onstandende _urgent, importunate_, #Sc# 111^4.

onstellan _to institute, create, originate, establish, give the example
of_, _Bl_; AO, CP. ['_onstell_']

onstêpan (= îe) _to raise_, ¶ Hy 4^38.

onstîgend m. _one who ascends or mounts_, VHy 4^1.

onsting m. _claim, authority, jurisdiction_, Ct.

onstîðian _to harden_, JnLR 12^40.

onstregdan^3 (and wk.) _to sprinkle_, #BJPs# 50^9; #VPs# (i^2).

onstydfullnes f. _instability_, DR.

onstýran _to govern_, BH 276^11 (v.l.).

onstyr-ednes, -enes f. _movement_.

onstyrian _to move, rouse, disturb, stir, agitate, excite_, CP.

onsund == ansund

onsun-dran, -dron, -drum adv. _singly, separately, apart_: _privately_:
_especially_.

onsundrian = âsyndrian  [[under "âsyndran"]]

onswâpan^7 _to sweep on, blow on_, #Gl#: _sweep away, banish_.

onswarian = andswarian

onswebban _to put to sleep, bury_, #Gl#.

onswîfan^1 _to swing forward, turn against_: _push off, put aside, turn
away_.

onswîðlic _mighty, loud_, ÆL 31^281.

onswôgan^7 (in-) _to encroach upon_, BH.

onswornod _confused_, NC 315.

onsymbelnes f. _celebration (of mass)_, BH 112^8.

onsýn = ansîen

onsýne ¶ _visible, evident_.

onsyngian = unsyngian

ontalu f. _claim at law_, TC 302^22.

ontênan (#KGl# 65^5) = ontýnan

ontendan _to kindle, set fire to, inflame_, _Æ, Lcd, LL_. ['_tind_,'
'_ontend_']

ontendnes (y) f. _burning, fire_, Æ: _inflammation_, Æ: _incitement,
fuel_, Æ: _passion_.

ontêon^2 _to draw to oneself, assume, undertake_, CP: _pull_: (= un-)
_untie_.

ontêona m. _injury, oppression_, #ERPs# 102^6.

ontige m. _claim, usurpation_, RB 140^9.

ontiht _intent, attentive, eager_, #Sc# 27^2.

ontihting f. _attention, application, aim, intention, instigation_,
#Sc#.

ontimber _matter, material_, Æ: _cause, reason, occasion_, Æ.

ontimbernes f. _material_, MF 171: _teaching, edification_.

ontimbr-an, -ian, _to instruct_, BH.

ontre = antre

ontrêowan _to entrust, confide_, #Da# 269?

ontýdran _to nourish, foster_, AO 182^26.

ontýdre _'sine foetu,' effete_, WW. [= ortydre?]

ontýgnes f. _accusation_, LL 22[37].

ontyhtan _to urge on, incite_, B 3086.

ontýnan (ê) _to open, reveal, display_, CP. [tûn]

ontyndnes = ontendnes

ontýnnes f. _opening_.

onðæslic (#Sc# 33^20) = unðæslic

onðenian _to stretch_, #EPs# 63^3.

onðêodan _to join oneself to, associate with, take part in_.

onðêon^1,3 ¶ _to be useful, succeed, prosper_.

onðêowigan _to serve_, CM 473.

±onðracian _to fear, dread_.

onðracung (an-) f. _fear, awe_, #LPs# 34^26.

on-ðræce, -ðræclic (an-) _formidable, dreadful_, Æ.

onðrêagung f. _reproach_, ÆL 23b^672.

onðrecan^5 refl. _to fear_, #Guth# 132^208.

onðringan^3 _to press on or forward_, AO: _move, be moved_? #Gu# 1300.

onðunian _to swell up_? _move round_? #Rd# 41^91: _exceed bounds_.

onðwægennes f. _washing_, HL 13^138,154.

onðwêan^6 _to wash_.

onu = heonu

onufan prep. (w. d.) and adv. _above, upon, on_, _Jud_; AO: _beyond,
after_. ['_anoven_']

onunder (an-) _under_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

onunwîsdôm? m. _ignorance_, #Bl# 89^10.

onuppan I. prep. (w. d.) _upon, on_, CP. II. adv. _in addition,
besides_.

onwacan^6 _to awake_, AO: _originate from, be born_.

onwaccan f. _incitement, arousing_, DR 74^12.

onwacnian = onwæcnian  [[under "onwæcnan"]]

onwadan^6 _to penetrate into, attach, seize, occupy_.

onw¯æcan _to weaken, shake (a resolution)_, _soften, mollify_, CP. [wâc]

onwæcenes f. _arousing_, GD 337^33.

on-wæcnan, -wæcnian (e) _to awake_, CP: _arise, spring, be born_.

onw¯æld (N) == onweald

onwæmme = unwemme

onw¯ære? adj. _unripe_, #Lcd# 12a.

onwæstm m. _increase_, DR 69^9. [ôwæstm]

onwæterig = unwæterig

onwald == onweald

onwalh == onwealg

onwarian _to guard oneself against_, MFH 171.

onwealcan^7 _to roll, roll round_.

onweald (a^1, a^2) I. mfn. _authority, power, rule, sway, command_, _AO,
Lk_; CP: _jurisdiction, territory_, CP. II. adj. _mighty, powerful_.
['_onwald_']

onwealda m. _ruler, governor, sovereign_: _the Lord, God_.

onwealdend m. _ruler_.

+onwealdian (an-) _to have dominion over, get possession of_, #LPs#,
LkLR (æ).

onwealdig (a^1, a^2) _powerful_.

onwealdnes f. _power, possession_, #ERPs# 2^8.

onwealg, onwealh _whole, sound, entire, uninjured, safe_, AO.

onwealglîce (an-) _wholly, completely_, CP.

onwealhnes f. _soundness, wholeness, purity, modesty, chastity_.

onweard (= and-) adj. _acting against, opposed to_.

onwecnian = onwæcnian  [[under "onwæcnan"]]

onweg (aweg) adv. _'away,' forth, out, off, onward, along_, _B, Chr_.

onwegâcyrrednes, -cyrnes f. _apostasy_, BH 176 (v.l.).

onwegâdrîfan^1 _to drive away_, #VPs#.

onwegâdrifennes f. _a driving away_, GD 185^13.

onwegâfirran _to remove away_, VHy.

onwegâl¯ædnes f. _removal_, BH 446^16.

onwegânýdan _to drive away, repel_.

onwegâscûfan^2 _to push away_, #VPs#.

onwegâwendan _to remove_, #VPs#.

onwegfæreld n. _departure_, GD 119^26.

onweggewit n. _aberration (of mind)_, #VPs# 115^11.

onweggewitennes f. _departure_, BH 170^10.

onwegnýdan = onwegânýdan

onwegoncernes = onwegâcerrednes  [[headword spelled "onwegâcyrrednes"]]

onwegpullian _to pull away_, ES 43·339.

onwendan _to change, exchange_: _upset, end, overturn, turn aside,
avert_, #VPs#: _change for the better, amend_: _change for the worse,
pervert_: _transgress_: _deprive_: _return_.

onwendedlic _changeable_, #Lcd# 3·164^8.

on-wendednes, -wendnes f. _movement, change, alteration_, #VPs#.

onweorpan^3 (in-) _cast in one's teeth, accuse_: _turn or throw aside_:
_begin the web_.

onweorpnes f. _onpouring_, BH 118^5.

onwêstan = âwêstan

onwîcan^1 _to yield, give, way_, #Gl#.

onwille _wished for, agreeable_, #Gu# 700.

onwindan^3 _unwind, loosen_: _retire, retreat_, #An# 531.

onwinnan^3 _to attack, assail_.

onwinnende _assailing, aggressive_, Æ.

onwist § f. _dwelling at a place, habitation_.

onwlite = andwlite

onworpennes f. _enticement, allurement, inspiration_.

onwrecan = âwrecan

onwrêon^1,2 _to uncover, unfold, display, explain, reveal_, Æ, CP.

on-wrig(en)nes, -wrihnes f. _revelation, exposure, exposition_, Æ.
[wrêon]

onwrîting f. _inscription_, _Lk_ 20^24. ['_onwriting_']

onwrîtung = onwrîðung

onwrîðan _to unbind, unwrap_, #Jud# 173.

onwrîðung f. _ligament, bandage_, WW 439^13 (onwrît-).

onwunian _to inhabit, remain_, #Ps#.

onwunung f. _dwelling-place_: _assiduity_, OEG 75.

onwurpan = onweorpan

onwyllan _to cause to boil, inflame_, #Gu# 362.

onwylwan _to roll up, roll together_, EHy 2^12.

onýðan _to pour in_, #Sc# 200^7.

onýwan _to show, manifest_.

open _'open,' exposed_, _AO, B, Bl, Jn, WW_: _evident, well-known,
public, manifest, plain, clear_, _AO, Bo, Jn_.

openærs m. _medlar_, WW 137^36. ['_openarse_']

openere m. _opener_, A 8·326^5.

±openian _to 'open,' open up, disclose, declare, reveal_, _Æ, BH, Ps_;
CP: (+) intr. _become manifest_: (+) _be open to, exposed to_.

openlic _open, public_, _WW_. adv. -lîce _'openly,' manifestly, plainly,
clearly, unreservedly_, _Bl, Bo, RB_.

opennes f. _openness, publicity_, OEG.

±openung f., _opening, disclosure, manifestation_.

oportanie = aprotane

ôr n. _beginning, origin_: _front_. [cp. ord]

or prefix (lit. '_out of_' = _L._ ex-) is privative, as in orsorg,
orwêna; or denotes origin, antiquity, as in oreald. [_Ger._ ur-]

ôra I. m. _border, bank, shore_, #Chr#; Mdf. II. m. _'ore,' unwrought
metal_, _BH, Ps, WW_: _brass_, _ÆGr, Cp, CP_. III. _a coin of Danish
origin_, _LkL, LL_ (v. 2·601). ['_ora_']

orað = oroð

orblêðe _bloodless_, WW 397^29. [blôd]

orc I. m. _pitcher, crock, cup_. [_Late L._ orca; _L._ urceus] II. m.
_demon_, #Gl#. [_L._ orcus]

or-cêape, -cêapes, -cêapunga, -cêapungum adv. _gratis, without cause_.

orc-eard, -erd (_Æ, Lcd_) = ortgeard

orcêas _inviolable, unimpugned, unassailed_, #Gl#.

orcêasnes f. _immunity, purity_, #Gl#.

orcerdlêh f. _orchard_. [ortgeard, lêah]

orcerdweard m. _gardener_, WW 333^25.

orcgeard, orcird = ortgeard

orcn¯æwe (â) _easily recognised, evident, well-known_.

orcnêas mp. _monsters_, B 112.

orcðyrs m. _monster of hell, Orcus_, WW.

orcyrd = ortgeard

ord m. _point, spear-point, spear_, _B, CP_: _source, beginning_, _Æ,
CP_: _front, vanguard_, Æ: _chief, prince_; in pl. _first men, the
flower_. ['_ord_']

ord¯æle _not participating_, WW.

ordâl (ê) n. '_ordeal_,' _LL_. [_Ger._ urteil]

ordâlîsen n. _iron used in an ordeal_, LL 388[1].

ordbana m. _(spear-slayer), murderer_, #Gen# 1097.

ordceard = ortgeard

ordêl = ordâl

ordfruma m. _fount, source_, Æ: _author, creator, instigator_, AO: (¶)
_head man, chief, prince_.

ordstæpe m. _spear-stab, wound_, #Rd# 71^16.

ordwyga ¶ m. _warrior_.

-ôre v. îsen-ô.

oreald _very old_, #Bo# 102^18. [_Ger._ uralt]

ôred- = ôret-

orel n. _robe, garment, mantle, veil_, Æ. [_L._ orarium]

oreldo = oryldu

orene I. _excessive_. II. n. _excess_.

orenlîce _excessively_, MF 171.

ôret ¶ m. _contest, battle_.

ôret- = ôrett-

ôretfeld m. _place of contest_, OEG 8^50.

ôretla m. _contumely, insult_, GD 200^16.

ôretlof n. _triumph_, CM 497.

ôret-mæcga, -mecg, -mæcg m. _champion, warrior_.

ôretscipe (orret-) m. _infamy_, WW.

ôretstôw f. _wrestling place, place of contest_, OEG.

ôrett- = ôret-

ôretta ¶ m. _champion, warrior, hero_.

±ôrettan _to put to confusion, disgrace_.

oreð = oroð

oreðian = orðian

orf n. _cattle, live stock_, _Æ, Chr, LL_. ['_orf_']

orfcwealm (a^2) m. _cattle-plague, murrain_.

orfcynn (i^2) n. _cattle_.

orfeorme (y) (¶) _destitute of, lacking_: (¶) _empty, useless_:
_squalid, filthy_.

orfeormnes f. _squalor, filthiness_, Cp 488#s#.

orfgebitt n. _grazing_, WW 149^33.

orfiermu f. _squalor_, OET 96^933.

orfyrme = orfeorme

orfyrmð _refuse_, OEG 609.

organ m. _canticle, song_: _voice_.

organa? organe? f., organ-an, -on pl. _musical instrument_, _Æ, ApT,
Ps_. ['_organ_'; _L._ organum]

organe f. _marjoram_, _Lcd_. ['_organ_'; _L._ origanum]

organian = orgnian

organystre _player on a musical instrument_, Æ (#Gen# 4^21).

orgeate = orgyte

orgel I. _pride_, _WW_ (o^2). ['_orgel_'] II. = organa

orgeldrêam m. _sound of a musical instrument_, _Bl_.

orgellic _ignominious_, CP. adv. -lîce _proudly, insolently,
scornfully_, Æ.

orgelnes f. _pride_, OEG 1108.

orgelword n. _arrogant speech_, Æ.

orgete = orgyte

orgilde _not having discharged a payment_ (_of_ 'wergeld'), LL.

orglîce = orgellîce

orgnian _to sing to an instrumental accompaniment_, #ÆGr# 181^2.

orgol == orgel

orgyte (ea, e) _well known, manifest_, AO.

orh- = org-

orhlættre = orleahtre

orhlýte _without lot or share in, destitute of_, Æ.

orîege _out of sight, not visible_, ANS 98·128.

orl m. = orel n.

orlæg ¶ (e) n. _fate_.

orleahter m. _'discrimen,' lack of vice or defect_, v. ES 37·179.

orleahtre _blameless_.

orleg = orlæg

orlegcêap m. _battle-booty_? #Gen# 1994.

orlege I. n. _conflict, strife, war_. II. adj. _hostile, inimical_.

orlegfrom _keen in battle_, #Rd# 21^15.

orleggîfre (æ) _fond of strife_, #Gen# 2287.

orleghwîl ¶ f. _war-time_.

orlegnîð ¶ m. _war, hostility_.

orlegsceaft f. '_supplicium_'? #Sol# 456? (GK).

orlegstund f. _time of adversity_, #Sol# 374.

orlegweorc n. battle. #Gen# 2020.

orm¯æte I. (â, ê) adj. _boundless, huge, excessive, intense_, _Æ, Chr_;
AO. II. adv. ['_ormete_'; metan]

orm¯ætlic _excessive_, #Chr# 1117.

orm¯ætnes f. _excess, immensity_, Æ.

or-mête, -mette = orm¯æte

ormôd _despondent, despairing, hopeless_, _Bo, Hept_; Æ, CP. ['_ormod_']

ormôdnes f. _desperation, despair_, CP.

orn (= arn) pret. 3 sg, of iernan.

orne = orene

ornest n. _trial by battle_, LL.

oroð n. _breath, breathing, snorting_.

orped _adult, active_. adv. -lîce _boldly_: _clearly, definitely_.

orrest f. _battle, combat_, #Chr#. [_ON._ orrusta]

orret- = ôret-

orsâwle _lifeless, dead_, Æ.

orsceattinga _gratuitously_, BH 242^7.

orsorg (w. g.) _unconcerned, without care or anxiety, safe_, CP.
[_OHG._ ursorg]

orsorglic (w. g.) _secure_, CP. adv. -lîce _carelessly, rashly_, Æ, CP:
_without anxiety or hindrance_: _securely, safely_, CP.

orsorgnes f. _security, prosperity_, CP.

orsorh = orsorg

ortgeard, orcerd m. _garden, 'orchard,'_ CP.

ortgeard- = orcerd-

ortrêowe = ortrîewe

ortrêownes f. _diffidence, mistrust_.

ortrîewan (y) _to despair of_: (+) _disbelieve_.

ortrîewe _despairing, hopeless_, _AO, W_ (êo, ý): _treacherous,
faithless_. ['_ortrow_']

±ortrûwian w. g. _to despair_, _Æ_. ['_ortrow_']

ortrûwung f. _despair_, #Sc# 131^3,4.

ortrýw- = ortrîew-

ortýdre _barren_, A 11·2^42.

orð (#KGl#) = oroð

orðanc I. mn. _intelligence, understanding, mind_: _cleverness, skill_:
_skilful work, mechanical art_, Æ. [_OHG._ urdank] II. adj. _ingenious,
skilful_.

orðancbend (o^2) f. _cunning bond, band_, #Rd# 43^15.

orðances ¶ _thoughtlessly_.

orðanclic _intelligent_? GD 269^13.

orðancpîl (o^2) m. _ploughshare_? #Rd# 22^13.

orðancscipe m. _mechanical art_, #Gl#.

orðancum _skilfully_.

orðian _to breathe, gasp_, Æ: _long for, aspire to_, Æ. [oroð]

orðonc (CP) == orðanc

orðung f. _breathing, breath_, Æ: _pore_.

oruð = oroð

orwearde adv. _unguarded_, B 3127.

orweg _trackless_? A 19·110.

orwegnes f. _state of being out of the way_, WW 220^34.

orwegstîg f. _out-of-the-way track_, WW.

orwêna indecl. adj. (w. g.) _hopeless, despairing of_, Æ.

+orwenan _to despair_, Æ.

or-wêne, -wêna (w. g.) _hopeless, despairing of_, Æ: _despaired of,
desperate_.

orwênnes f. _despair_, Æ.

orwîge _not fighting, unwarlike, cowardly_: _not liable to the legal
consequences (of homicide)_, LL 76[42,5,7].

orwîte = orwîge

orwurð n. _ignominy_, #CPs# 82^17.

orwyrð (#VPs#), orwyrðu f. _shame, dishonour_: _abuse_.

+orwyrðan _to disgrace_.

orwyrðlic _shameful_, MH 156^21.

oryldu f. _great age_. [ieldo]

ôs m., gp. êsa _a divinity, god_: _name of the rune for =o=_.

oser _'vimen,' osier_, OEG 10^2.

ôsle f. _'merula_,' '_ouzel,' blackbird_, _Cp, Ep, WW_. [amsel]

ôst m. _protuberance, knot, lump_.

osterhlâf m. _oyster-patty_, #Lcd# 79a.

ôstig, ôstiht _knotty, rough, scaly_, #Gl#.

ostorscyll f. _oyster-shell_, #Lcd# 1·338^16.

ostre f. _oyster_, WW. [_L._ ostrca]

ot I. (#VPs#, N) = æt. II. = oð

oter (_KC_) = otor

oterhola m. _otter's hole_, KC 3·23^28.

otor, otr (_Ep_), ottor m. '_otter_,' _WW_.

otsperning (#KGl# 70^16) = ætspornung

oð I. prep. w. a. and (rarely) d. _to, up to, as far as_: _until_, Æ,
AO, CP. oð ðisum _up to now_, ES 43·166. II. conj. _until_. III. as
prefix. usu. denotes departure, separation, as in oðfeallan, oðwendan.

oðberan ¶ _to bear away, carry off_: _bring_.

oðberstan^3 _to break away, escape_.

oð-brêdan, -bregdan^3 _to snatch away, carry off, rescue, remove,
withdraw_, _Gu_; AO. ['_atbraid_']

oðclîfan^1 _to cleave to, stick, adhere_, #Cr# 1267.

oðcwelan^4 _to die_, LL 112[53].

oðcyrran _to be turned from, perverted_, #Jul# 338. [cierran]

oðdôn anv. _to put out (eyes)_, LL 32[19].

oðêawan = oðîewan

oðêcan _to add to_, #VPs# 68^27. [êac]

oðêhtian _to drive away_, #Lcd# 1·384^15.

ôðel = êðel

oðêowan = oðîewan

ôðer I. pron. sb. or adj. (always strong) _one of two_, _Æ, AO, BH, Bo,
LL_: _second_, _Æ, Bo, BH, Mt_: '_other_,' _BH, LL, Mt_: _something
else, anything else_, _BH, Bo_: _alternate, next_: _remaining, rest_,
_A, AO, Ps_: _further, existing besides_, _Æ, Bl, Bo_: _another_:
(in pl.) _the rest, the others_. ôðer...ôðer _the one...the other_, _Æ,
Bl, CP_: _other...than_, _CP_. ôðer oððe...oððe _either...or_. ôðer
healf _one and a half_, _BH_. II. ('_aut_') = âhwæðer. comp. adv.
ôðerlîcor _otherwise_, _RB_ 87^19. ['_otherliker_'] III. _word, speech_
('_eloquium_'), #PPs# 118^38. [_ON._ ôðr]

oðêwan = oðîewan

oðfæstan ¶ _to inflict upon_: _set to (a task)_, _entrust, commit_, CP.

oðfaran^6 w. d. _to flee from, escape_, _Ex_. ['_atfare_']

oðfeallan^1 _to fall off, decline, decay_, CP: _fall away from, be lost
to, be wanting, fail_: _cease to concern_.

oðfêolan^3 _to cleave, adhere_, WW 416^24.

oðferian _to take away, bear off_: _save (life)_.

oðflêogan^2 _to fly away_, #Ph# 347.

oðflêon^2 (w. d.) _to flee away, escape_, Æ, AO.

oðflîtan^1 _to gain by legal process_, Ct.

oðgân anv. _to go away, escape_, B 2934.

oðglîdan^1 _to glide away, escape_, #Sol# 401.

oðgrîpan^1 _to rescue_, BH 408^27.

oðhealdan^7 _to keep back_, _CP_. ['_athold_']

oðhebban^6 _to raise, exalt, lift up_, CP.

oðhelde = oðhylde

oðhlêapan^7 _to escape_, LL 218[1,11].

oðhrînan^1 _to touch_, HL 16^228.

oðhýdan _to hide from_, AO 94^11.

oðhylde (e) _contented_, #Lcd#.

ôðian _to pant_. [cp. êðian]

oðiernan^3 _to run away_.

oðîewan (ê, êa, êo, î, ý) tr. _to show_, _Gen_; CP: _show oneself,
appear, become visible_, _El_ (ý). ['_atew_']

oðl¯ædan _to lead away, carry off, snatch from, withdraw_.

oðrân = oðhrân, pret. 3 sg. of oðhrînan.

oðrîdan^1 _to ride, proceed_, #Hell# 40.

oðrinnan^3 _to run off, escape_, #Met# 20^138.

oðrôwan^7 _to escape by rowing, row away_, #Chr# 897#a#.

oðsacan^6 (w. g.) _to deny, abjure_, AO.

oðscacan^6 _to escape_, LL 177[6,3].

oðscêotan^2 _to escape, slip off, turn aside_, Æ.

oðscûfan^2 intr. _to move off_, #Ph# 168.

ôðsperning f. _stumbling-block_, #KGl#.

oðspurnan^3 (o) _to dash against_.

oðstandan^6 _to stand fixed, remain, stop, cease_, AO: _stand behind_,
Æ: _perplex, hinder_.

oðstillan _to stop_, #Lcd# 1·82^5.

oðswerian^6 _to abjure, deny on oath_, AO.

oðswîgan _to cease speaking, become silent_, OET 631.

oðswimman^3 (y) _to escape by swimming_, #Chr# 915#d#.

oðtêon^2 _to take away_, #Lcd# 87a.

oðða = oððe

oððæt conj. _until_.

oððe conj. _or_, _Chr, Ct, VPs_. oððe...oððe _either...or_, BH.
['_other_'] (= oð ðe) _until_.

oððêodan _to sever, dismember_, #An# 1423.

oððet (#KGl# 61^19) = oððæt

oððicgan^5 _to take away_, #Ex# 338.

oððingian _to obtain by unfair means, usurp_, LL (412^9).

oððon conj. _or_. [= oððe]

oððringan^3 _to deprive of_, AO: _drive out_, GD.

oðwendan _to turn away, divert, deprive of_, _Gen_ 403. ['_atwend_']

oðwindan^3 _to escape, get away_, #Chr# 897#a#.

oðwîtan^1 _to charge with, blame, reproach with, taunt_, AO, CP.

oðwyrcan _to harm_? #Lcd# 1·384^5.

oðýwan = oðîewan

ôwæstm m. _shoot, branch, twig_.

ôwana (N) = âhwonan

ô-web, -wef (â) n. _woof, weft_, _WW_. ['_abb_']

ôwêr, ôwern (BH) = âhw¯ær

ôwiht = âwiht

ôwisc f. _edge_, KC 3·388^25.

ôwðer = âhwæðer

ôwul = âwel

oxa m. nap. oxan, [oe]xen, exen, dp. ox(n)um '_ox_,' _Ct, JnL, Rd, VPs,
WW_; CP.

oxancelf n. _ox-calf_, Æ.

oxangang m. _an eighth of a 'plough-land,' hide_.

oxanhyrde m. _herdsman_, OEG, WW.

oxanslyppe f. '_oxlip_,' _Lcd_.

ôxn f. _arm-pit_, WW.

oxnahyrde = oxanhyrde

oxnalybb n. _ox-heal (plant)_, #Lcd#.

oxstælde _equal to_? _competent for_? Cp 1032. (v. ES 43·314).

ôxta = ôcusta

oxum v. oxa.

oxumelle m. _oxymel_.




=P=


pâd f. _covering, coat, cloak_, WW.

padde, pade, f. _toad, frog_, BC 2·377^16; #Chr# 1137. [_ON._ padda]

p¯æca m. _deceiver_, #Bas# 40^21.

p¯æcan _to cheat, deceive_.

pægel m. _gill, small measure, wine vessel_, _WW_ 124^2 (A 8·450).
[v. '_pail_']

p¯æl ?= pâl (v. OEG 19^3).

pæll (e) m. _silk robe, cloak_, _ÆGr_: _'pall,' hanging, covering_, Æ:
_purple garment, purple_, _BH, WW_. [_L._ pallium]

pællen (e) _of costly stuff, purple_, _Æ_. ['_pallen_']

pællerêad = fellerêad

pælm == palm

pæneg, pæning = pening

-p¯æran v. â-, for-p.

pærl? '_enula_,' ('_gemmula_'? Wülker), #ÆGr# 304^7.

p¯ætig = (pr¯ætig), prættig

pæð (a) mfn. nap. paðas _'path,' track_, _Cp, Chr, Ps_; Æ: _valley_,
_LkL_.

pæððan _to traverse, travel over, pass along_, _Met, Rd_. ['_path_']

pâl m. _'pole,' stake, post_, _WW_ 334^2: _spade_. [_L._ palus]

palendse (AO), palentse, pal(l)ente f., pâlent (Æ) m. _palace_. [_Late
L._ palantium _or_ palantia]

pâlentlic _belonging to a palace, palatial_, WW 342^7.

palester = palstr

pallium m. _pallium_, ÆL 36^166. [_L._]

palm (æ), palma m. _'palm' tree_, _Æ, JnL, VPs_.

palm-æppel, -appel m. _date_, WW.

palmbearu m. _palm-grove_, WW 488^13.

palm-dæg (Æ), -sunnandæg (_Lk_ 19^29) m. '_Palm Sunday_.'

palm-trêo, -trêow m. '_palm-tree_,' _Æ, Jn_.

palmtwig n. _palm twig, palm branch_, Æ.

+palmtwigian ¶ _to deck with palm-branches_.

palmwuce f. _week of which Palm Sunday is the first day_.

palstr, palster sb. _prick, point, spike_, #Gl#.

pandher m. _panther_, #Pa# 12.

panic m. _a kind of millet_, #Lcd#.

panmete m. _cooked food_, WW 409^9.

panne (o) f. '_pan_,' _CP, WW_.

pâpa m. '_pope_,' _BH_; Æ, CP. [_L._ papa]

pâpanhâd m. _papal office_, _Æ_. ['_popehood_']

pâpdôm m. _papacy_, #Chr#.

paper m? _papyrus_, WW 523^7.

papig = popig

papolstân m. _pebble_, _Æ_. ['_pebblestone_'; _L._ papula]

pâp-seld, -setl n. _papacy_, #Bl# 205^20.

paralisin ds. of sb. _paralysis_, ÆL.

pard m. _panther_. [_L._ pardus]

-parian v. â-p.

part m. '_part_,' _ÆGr_. [_L._ partem]

passion f. nap. passione _the part of the gospel containing the account
of Christ's passion_, OET 444^37.

pað = pæð

pâwa m. pâwe f. _peacock, peahen_, _ÆGr, Ep, Lcd, WW_. ['_po_'; _Lat._
pavo]

pêa m. _peafowl_, _Ph_ 312. ['_pea_']

peall? '_defrutum_' (sc. _vinum_), OEG (v. ES 37·184).

peaneg = pening

pear-roc, -ruc m. _'clatrum,' fence with which a space is enclosed_,
_Gl_: _enclosure, enclosed land_, _Bo, Chr, KC_; ÆL. ['_parrock_']

pecg m? _pig_? BC 3·223 (pygg? v. #SkED#).

pell = pæll

pellen = pællen

pellican m. '_pelican_,' _Ps_ 101^5.

pen = penn

pending, pene(n)g, penig = pening

pening m. _'penny,' coin, money_, _Æ, Cp, Ct, G, LL_ (v. 2·614):
_pennyweight_, _Lcd_.

pening-hwyrfere, -mangere m. _money-changer_, WW.

peningslæht m. _coining money_, MtL 17^25.

peningw¯æg f. _pennyweight_, #Lcd# 47b.

peningweorð n. _pennyworth_, _Lcd, KC_ (u^3); Æ.

penn m. _'pen,' fold_, _BC_; Mdf. [_L._]

pennig, penning = pening

pentecosten m. '_Pentecost_,' _A, Æ_.

pêo = pîe

peonie f. '_peony_,' _Lcd_ 1·168^14. [_L._]

peorð m. _name of the rune for =p=, chessman_? #Run# 38.

peose (piose, pyose) = pise

pere = peru

perewôs n. _pear-juice, perry_, WW 128^20.

perfince = perwince

pernex m. _a supposed bird_? (mistranslation of _L._ pernix), #Rd#
41^66.

per-sic, -soc, -suc m. _peach_. [_L._ persicum]

persoctrêow n. _peach-tree_, _WW_ 138^1.

peru f. '_pear_,' _ÆGr_. [_L._ pirum]

perwince f. _'periwinkle' (plant)_, _WW_.

petersilie f. '_parsley_,' _Lcd_. [_Ger._ petersilie]

pêtig = (pr¯ætig), prættig

peððan = pæððan

philosoph m. _philosopher_, AO.

pic n. '_pitch_,' _Ep, Sc_; Æ. [_L._ picem]

pîc m. _point, pointed tool, pick, pickaxe_, _Cp, WW_. ['_pike_']

picen _pitchy, of pitch_.

+pîcian _to cover with 'pitch,'_ _Lcd_ 10a.

pîcung f. '_pricking_,' _Cp_ 572#s# ('_stigmata_').

pîe f. _parasite_, #Gl#.

pierisc _Pierian_, A 31·535.

pigment, pihment (y) _drug_, #Lcd#. [_L._]

pihten _part of a loom_, OEG. [_L._ pecten]

pîl m. _a pointed object, spike, nail, shaft, stake_, _Æ_: _arrow, dart,
javelin_: pl. _hairs of plants_, _Lcd_ 1·304. ['_pile_'; _L._ pilum]

pilce = pylece

pile = pyle

pîle f. _mortar_, CP. [_L._ pila]

pilece = pylece

pîlere m. _one who pounds in a mortar_, WW 141^9.

pîlian _to pound in a mortar_, WW 114^25.

pillsâpe f. _'silotrum,' soap for removing hair_? WW 127^36 (v. ES
43·334).

+pilod _piled up_, #Ex# 16^14.

pîlstæf m. _pestle_, CP 267^2.

pîl-stampe f., -stocc m., pîlstre f. _pestle_, WW.

pîn f. _pain, torment, anguish, torture_. [_L._ poena]

pînbêam m. _pine-tree_, _Æ_. [v. '_pine_']

pinca = pynca

pînecwalu m? n? _torture_, W 241^13.

pînere m. _tormentor_.

pinewincle = winewincle

pingan = pyngan

pîn-hnutu f. ds. -hnyte _fir-cone_, _Lcd_. ['_pine-nut_']

±pînian _to torture, torment_, _AO, MtL_; Æ, CP. ['_pine_'; _L._ poena]

pinn sb. _'pin,' peg_, _A_: _pen_. [_L._ penna]

pinnan obl. case of wk. sb. pinne? _flask, bottle_, WW 97^10.

pînnes f. _pain, torture_, TC 369^34.

pinsian _to weigh, consider, examine, reflect_, CP. [_L._ pensare]

pintel '_penis_,' WW 292^16. ['_pintle_']

pîntrêow n. '_pine-tree_,' _Lcd_; ÆL.

pîn-trêowen, -trýwen _of or belonging to a pine-tree_, #Lcd#.

pînung f. _torture, torment, punishment_, Æ, AO.

pînungtôl n. _instrument of torture_, Æ.

pionie (OEG 56^418) = peonie

piose = pise

pîpdrêam m. _piping_, #Lcd# 3·208^22.

pîpe f. _'pipe,' tube_, _Lcd_; Mdf: _wind instrument_, _W, ZDA_.

pipeneale f. _pimpernel_.

piper = pipor

pîpere m. '_piper_,' _MtR, WW_.

piperhorn m. _horn for pepper, pepper-castor_, LL 455[17].

pîpian _to 'pipe,' (blow an instrument)_, _NC_ (ZDA 34·234).

piplian (y) _to show eruptions, break out in pimples_, #Lcd#.

pîplic _musical_, OEG 1644.

pipor (e^2) m. '_pepper_,' _Æ, Lcd_. [_L._ piper]

piporcorn n. '_pepper-corn_,' _Lcd_.

piporcwyrn f. _pepper mill_, ANS 84·325.

±piporian, -piprian _to season with 'pepper,'_ _Lcd_.

pirenisc _Pyrrhenian_, A 31·535.

pirge (#Gl#) = pirie

pirgrâf m. _pear-orchard_, KC 5·284^23.

pirie, pirige (Æ) f. _pear-tree_.

pîs _heavy_, NG. [_L._ pensum]

pise f. (eo, io, y) _pea_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_. ['_pease_']

pîsle f. _warm chamber_? WW 186^10. [_Low L._ pisalis]

pîslic _heavy_, NG. adv. -lîce.

pistel == pistol

pistol m. _letter_, Æ: _apostolic letter_, Æ. ['_pistle_'; _L._
epistola]

pistolbôc f. _book of the epistles_, _LL_. [v. '_pistle_']

pistolclâð m. _vestment worn by the epistoller_, BC 3·366´.

pistolr¯ædere m. _epistle-reader, sub-deacon_, CM 584 etc.

pistolr¯æding f. _a lesson in the church service_, _Æ_. [v. '_pistle_']

pistolrocc m. _vestment worn by the epistoller_, TC 429^22 (e^2).

pitt == pytt

piða wm. _inward part, 'pith,'_ _Bo_; CP.

placunis = wlacunis  [[headword spelled "wlacunes"]]

plæce f. _open space, street_, _DR, MtLR_. ['_place_'; _L._ platea]

plæg- = pleg-

plæse, plætse = plæce

plætt m. _slap, smack_, ÆH 2·248^25.

plættan _to buffet, smack_, _Jn_ 19^3. ['_plat_']

plagian = plegian

plante f. _'plant,' shoot_, _CP, VPs_. [_L._ planta]

±plantian _to 'plant,'_ _Æ, CP, VPs_.

plantsticca m. _dibble_, WW 106^17.

plantung f. '_planting_,' _WW_: _plant_, _Mt_.

plaster I. n. _'plaster' (as medicament)_, _DD, Lcd_. [_L._ emplastrum]
II. = palster  [[II. under "palstr"]]

plasterplatian _to cover with metal plates_.

+platod _plated (of gold)_, OEG 11^61.

platung f. _metal plate_, _WW_ 196^24. [v. '_plate_']

pleagian = plegian

plega (a, æ) m. _quick motion, movement, exercise_, _Chr, Cp_ (æ), _Cr,
Gen, WW_: _'play,' festivity, drama, game, sport_, _AO, Bl_; Æ:
_battle_, _B_: _applause_.

plegan, ±plegian (a, æ, eo) (pres. occly. strong) ¶_to move rapidly_,
_An, Gen_: _exercise, occupy or busy oneself_, _Bo, Bl, LL_: _'play,'
sport with, amuse oneself, dance_, _CP, MtL_: _contend, fight_: _play on
an instrument_, _VPs_: _clap the hands, applaud_, _El, VPs_: _make sport
of, mock_, _Æ, Gen_: _cohabit (with)_, _Rd_ 43^2.

plegemann = plegmann

plegende '_playing_,' _Shr_.

plegere m. '_player_,' _WW_ 108^9.

plegestôw = plegstôw

plegestre f. _female athlete_, OEG 4735.

pleghûs n. _'playhouse,' theatre_, _OEG_ 1752.

plegian = plegan

pleglic (#Gl#) _athletic_: _scenic_: _comic_.

plegmann m. _gymnosophist, athlete_, #Gl#.

plegol _playful, jocular_, ÆL 21^292.

plegscip n. _small vessel_, WW 181^40.

plegscyld (e^2) m. _play-shield, small shield_, #Gl#.

plegstôw f. _playground, gymnasium, amphitheatre_, _Lcd, WW_.
['_playstow_']

plêo ds. of pleoh.

pleogan = plegan

pleoh n. gs. plêos _danger, risk, harm_, Æ, AO, CP: _responsibility_, LL
70[36,2].

plêolic _dangerous, hurtful, hazardous_, Æ, AO.

plêon^5 (w. g.) _to expose to danger, adventure oneself_, CP.

plett f? _fold_, NG. [_L._ plecta]

plice v. plyccan.

plicettan? _to play with_, v. NC 315.

plicgan _to scrape, scratch_, GPH 396.

pliht m. _peril, risk, danger, damage_, _VPs, WW_; Æ. tô plihte
_dangerously_. [plêon; '_plight_']

plihtan _to imperil, endanger, compromise_, _LL_. ['_plight_']

plihtere m. _look-out man at the prow_, OEG.

plihtlic _perilous, dangerous_.

ploccan = pluccian

plôg, plôh m. _what a yoke of oxen could plough in a day, a
plough-land_, _Lcd_. ['_plough_']

plont- = plant-

plot _plot of ground_, LL 400[3].

pluccian _to 'pluck,' tear_, _Æ, Mt, WW_.

plûmbl¯æd f. _plum_, #Lcd# 86a.

plûme f. '_plum_,' _Æ, Cp_: _plum-tree_, _Cp, Ep, Erf_; Mdf.

plûmfeðer f. _down_, ES 9·39. [_L._ pluma]

plûmsêaw n. _plum-juice_, #Lcd# 3·114^21 (ê).

plûmslâ f. _wild plum, sloe_, WW 139^4.

plûmtrêow n. _plum-tree_, Æ.

plyccan only in plice 2 sg. subj. (_IM_ 122) and plyce (imperat.) (_IM_
127) _to pluck, pull, snatch_, NC 315. ['_plitch_']

plyhtlic = plihtlic

plýme f. _plum, plum-tree_, #Gl#. [_L._ *prunea]

pocâdl f. _eruptive disease, pox_, #Lcd#.

pocc m. _'pock,' blister, pustule, blain, ulcer_, _Lcd_.

pocca (LkL) = pohha

pohha, poh(ch)a m. _pocket, bag_, _CP, MkL_. ['_pough_']

pohhede _baggy_, _RB_. ['_pough_']

pôl m. '_pool_,' _CP, JnL_; Æ; Mdf.

polente? f. _parched corn_, _Æ_. ['_polenta_'; _L._]

pollegie f. _pennyroyal_, #Lcd#. [_L._ pulegium]

pollup m. _scourge_? (BT), LL (278^26).

pon- = pan-

pond = pynd

popæg (Cp) = popig

popelstân (_OEG_ 1815) = papolstân

popig m? '_poppy_,' _Gl, WW_.

por, porr, porlêac n. _leek_, Æ. [_L._ porrum]

port I. mn. _'port,' harbour_, _AO_: _town with a harbour_, _BH_; Mdf.
[_L._ portus] II. m. _portal, door, gate, entrance_, _MtL, Ps_; Mdf.
['_port_'; _L._ porta]

portcwêne f. _prostitute_, NG.

porte f. = port II.

portgeat n. _city gate_, Æ.

portgerêfa m. _'port-reeve,' mayor_, _Æ, LL, WW_.

portgeriht n. _town-due_, KC 3·138^10.

±portian _to bray (in a mortar)_, CP.

portic mn. _portico_, _'porch,' vestibule, sanctuary, chapel_, _BH, Jn_;
Æ. [_L._ porticus]

portmann m. _townsman, burgess_, _Æ, WW_. ['_portman_']

portstr¯æt f. _public street_, Ct.

portweall m. _city wall_, Æ.

port-wer, -weora (= -wara) m. _citizen_.

±pos n. _cold in head_, _Lcd_. ['_pose_']

posa = pusa

posl, postling m. _pellet, pill_, #Lcd#.

post m. '_post_,' _Æ, WW_. [_L._ postis]

postol m. _apostle_, _LkR_. ['_postle_']

potian _to push, butt, goad_, _Æ, W_. ['_pote_']

pott m. '_pot_,' _Lcd_ 1·378 (v. late).

pottere m. _potter_, BC 3·49´.

prætt m. nap. prattas _trick, craft, art_, _Æ, W, ZDA_. ['_prat_']

prættig (e) _tricky, sly, cunning, wily, astute_, _WW_; Æ. ['_pretty_']

prafost (o^1, a^2, e^2) m. _officer_, _'provost' (of a monastery)_, _KC,
MH, RB_; Æ. [_L._ propos(i)tus]

prafostfolgoð m. _order or rank of provost_, RB 126^6.

prafostscîr f. _provostship_, RB 124^16.

pranga v. wranga.

prass m. _array, pomp_, Æ.

prattas v. prætt.

prêan = prêon

prêde = prýde, prýte  [["prýte" under "prýto"]]

prêdicere m. _preacher_, #ÆGr# 276^1.

prêdician _to preach_, Lk 8^1.

prêdicung f. _preaching_, NC 315.

prêon m. _'fibula,' pin, brooch_, _TC, WW_. ['_preen_']

prêost (êa, ê, îo) m. _'priest,' presbyter_, _BH, LL, Mt, WW_; AO, CP.

prêostgesamnung f. _community of priests_, NC 315.

prêosthâd m. '_priesthood_,' _BH, OEG_; Æ, CP.

prêosthêap m. _body of priests_, GD 302^25.

prêosthîred (ý^2) m. _body of priests_.

prêostlagu f. _ecclesiastical law, canon law_, LL 380[2,3].

prêostlic _'priestly,' canonical_, CM 667.

prêostrêaf n. _priestly garment_, NC 316.

prêostregol m. _canonical rule_, NC 316.

prêostscýr f. _parish_, _LL_. ['_priestshire_']

prêowthwîl f. _twinkling of an eye, moment_, Æ.

press f. _press_, A 9·263^12.

prica m., price f. _'prick,' point, spot, dot_, _Æ, Lcd, Mt_: _small
portion of space or time_, _A, Æ_.

-priccan v. â-p.

pricel, pricels m. _'prickle,' goad, point_, _Lk, OEG_: _jot, tittle_,
_MtL, LkL_.

±prician tr. _to pierce_, _Æ_: intr. _'prick,' sting_, _Sc_: (+) _point
out_, A 8·324.

pricm¯ælum adv. _by points_.

pricung f. _'pricking,' remorse_, _Æ_ 2·88^22.

prîm n? _the first hour (6 a.m.)_: _the service held at 6 a.m.,
'prime,'_ _WW_. [_L._ prima (_sc._ hora)]

prîmsang m. _prime-song, service of prime_.

prince? _twinkling of an eye, moment_, v. OEG 2369.

prior m. '_prior_,' _TC_. [_L._]

prît = prýt  [[form of "prýto"]]

prodbor (prot-) n. _auger_? MtR.

profast = prafost

prôfian _to assume to be, take for_, LL. [_L._ probare]

profost = prafost

prût _'proud,' arrogant_, _OEG, Sc_.

prutene (û?) f. _southern-wood, wormwood_, #Lcd#. [_L._ abrotanum]

prûtian _to be 'proud,'_ _NC_ 316.

prûtlice adv. _proudly, pompously, magnificently_.

prûtscipe m. _arrogance, pride_.

prûtswongor _overburdened with pride_, W 257^12 (v.l.).

prûtung f. _pride, arrogance_, _OEG_. [v. '_proud_']

prýde = prýte  [[under "prýto"]]

prýdecere = prêdicere

prýto, prýte f. _'pride,' haughtiness, pomp_, _Æ, LL, OEG, W_.

psaltere (_Lcd_) = saltere

psealm (_WW_), psalm == sealm

pûca m. _goblin_, _OEG_ 23^2. ['_puck_']

pûcel m. _goblin_, _GPH_ 394^242. ['_puckle_']

pucian _to poke, creep_, GPH 397.

pudd m. _ditch_, GPH 399.

puduc m. _wart_, GPH 396.

pull = pôl

pullian _to 'pull,' draw_, _A_: _pluck off (wool)_, _Lcd_ 3·176.

pûlsper n. _reed_, MtL 11^7 (v. A 39·364).

pumic m? _pumice_. [_L._ pumicem]

pumicstân m. _pumice-stone_, WW 148^3.

pund n. _'pound' (in weight or in money), pint_, _A, Ct, G, Lcd_; Æ, AO.
[_L._ pondo]

pundar, pundor = pundur

pundere m. _one who weighs_, MtL p2^3.

pundern n. _pair of scales_, OEG.

pundm¯æte adj. _of a pound weight_, RB 63^16.

pundur n. _weight, plumb-line_, Cp 264#d#. [_L._ pondere]

pundw¯æg f. _pound weight, measure (of corn)_, LL.

pûnere m. _'pounder,' pestle_, _Sc_ 95^19.

pung m. _purse_, #Gl#.

pungetung f. _pricking_, #Lcd#. [pyngan]

±pûnian _to 'pound,' beat, bruise_, _Lcd, Sc_.

punt _punt_, WW. [_L._ ponto]

pûr _bittern_? _sea-gull_? WW.

purlamb n. _lamb without blemish_, Æ (#Ex# 12^5).

purpl, purple (_JnL_) = purpur  [[under "purpure"]]

purpure f., purpur (WW 152^20) _'purple,' a purple garment_, _AO, Mk_;
CP. [_L._]

purpuren _purple_, _WW_ 151^24. ['_purpurine_']

purs '_purse_,' _OEG_ 18#b#^36. [_late L._ bursa]

pusa (o) m. _bag, scrip_, Æ.

puslian _to pick out_, #Lcd# 127a.

-pûte v. ¯æle-p.

pûtung f. _instigation_, v. NC 316. ['_putting_']

pýcan _to 'pick,'_ _Chr_ 796#f#?

pyff _a puff of wind_, BDS 24·245; ES 38·295.

pyffan, pret. pyfte _to puff, blow_, v. OEG 1886.

pyhment = pigment

pylce (_A_ 7·30) = pylece

pyle (i) m. '_pillow_,' _Æ, AO, CP, Lcd_. [_L._ pulvinum]

pylece f. _a warm fur garment, robe, pelisse_, _WW_. ['_pilch_']

pylewer _pillow_, OEG 56^16. ['_pilliver_']

pyll = pull, pôl

pylu (OEG 29^4), pylwe = pyle

pynca (i) m. _point_, OEG 3683. [pyngan]

pynd? sb. _cistern_? _lake_? #Rim# 49.

+pyndan _to impound, shut up_, _CP_ 276. ['_pind_']

pynding f. _dam_, _CP_ 276. [v. '_pind_']

pyngan (i) _to prick_, _CP_. ['_ping_'; _L._ pungere]

pypelian = piplian

pyretre f. _pellitory_, #Lcd# 3·12^19. [_L._ pyrethrum]

pyrie = pirie

pyrige = pirige  [[under "pirie"]]

pyrtan _to strike, beat_, GPH 401.

pyse (Æ) = pise

pysecynn n. _sort of pea_, #Lcd# 71a.

pýsian = pinsian

pýtan _to put out (eyes)_, #Chr# 796#f#?

pytt m. _'pit,' hole, well, grave_, _AO, Ct, G, LL_; CP; Mdf: _pustule_.
[_L._ puteus]

pytted _'pitted,' dented, marked (of a sword)_, _EC_ 225.

pyttel (i) m. _hawk, kite_, WW.




=Q=


qu- is usually written cw-, which see.




=R=


râ m. nap. rân _'roe,' roebuck_, _BH, Erf, Lcd_; Mdf.

rabbian _to rage_, W 84^11.

raca m. '_rake_,' _WW_; GD 192.

racca m. _part of the rigging of a ship_, WW.

racente f. _chain, fetter_, _Bl, Bo, Sc_; AO. ['_rackan_']

+racentêagian _to chain_, ÆL 31^35.

racen-têah f. gs. -têage _chain, fetter_, _Bl_; Æ. ['_rakenteie_']

racete = racente

racetêage (Mk) = racentêah

racian (w. d.) _to rule, govern, control_: _go forward, move_, _CP, W_:
_hasten_, NR 28^25. ['_rake_']

râcing (_JnL_) = r¯æcing

racu I. f. _exposition, explanation, observation, account, narrative_,
Æ, CP: _rhetoric_: _comedy_. [reccan] II. f. (LL 455^15) = raca

râd I. f. _ride, riding, expedition, journey_, _BH, Bo, Lcd_: _raid_,
_Chr, LL_: _modulation_, #Run# 5: _name of the rune for =r=_. ['_road_';
rîdan] II. pret. 3 sg. of rîdan. III. m. = r¯æd

+râd I. n. _reckoning, account_: _condition, stipulation_: _reason,
wisdom_, Æ, AO: _accuracy_. ðus +r. _such, of this kind_. hû +râdes
_how_. II. adj. _conditioned, circumstanced_, CP: _wise, clever,
skilful_, _Bo_; AO: _straight_, _Guth_. +râde spræc _prose_.

-râd v. brand-r.

râdcniht m. _tenant holding subject to service on horseback_, v. L 1·73.
['_radknight_']

rade = hraðe

+râdegian = +râdian

râdehere, râdhere = r¯ædehere

radelod _having straight branches_? BC 3·44.

râdhors n. _riding-horse_, _HL_. ['_roadhorse_']

radian = hradian

+râdian _to reckon with, arrange_, #Bo# 96^15: _call to account_.

+râdlic _wise, prudent, learned_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ.

+râdnes f. _compact_.

rador == rodor

râdor = râhdêor

radost = hraðost, v. hraðe.

râdpytt m. _draw-well_? #Rd# 59^15.

+râdscipe m. _discretion_, #Met# 22^48.

râdstefn f. _term of service performed by a mounted man_, LL 456[3].
[cp. râdcniht]

râdumbel = râradumbla

râdwêrig _weary of travelling_, #Rd# 21^14.

ræc = rec

ræcan, ræccan = reccan

r¯æcan I. _to 'reach' out, stretch out_, _Æ, B, CP, Cr, Sat_: _offer,
present, give, grant_, _Jn, RB_; Æ: _extend_ (intr.), _Gen, Rd, Sol_:
_carry, convey_, LL 447[4,1b]. II. = hr¯æcan

+r¯æcan _'reach,' attain, overtake_, _Bl, Sat_: _obtain by seizure, take,
get, gain_, _Chr_; AO: _address, speak to_: _handle, deal with_.

ræcc m. _setter (dog)_, WW 276^4.

ræce f. (_Cp_) = raca

ræced == reced

r¯æcing f. _'reaching,' holding out, presenting_, _JnL_.

ræd = hræd

r¯æd I. (â, ê) m. _advice, counsel_, _Æ, B_: _resolution, deliberation,
plan, way, design_, _Æ, AO_: _council, conspiracy_, _Æ, B_: _decree,
ordinance_, CP: _wisdom, sense, reason, intelligence_, _El_; Æ: _gain,
profit, benefit, good fortune, remedy_, _Æ, Met_: _help_: _power, might_
tô r¯æde +niman _resolve_, _AO_. tô r¯æde ðincan _seem advisable_, _Bl_.
['_rede_'] II. adj. = rêad. III. (ê) n. _reading, lesson_, _NG_.
['_read_']

r¯ædan^7 (ê) pret. 3 sg. reord, rêd; also wv. (±) _to advise, counsel,
persuade_, _El, Ma_; Æ: (±) _consult, discuss, deliberate, plot,
design_, _Æ, AO, BH_: (±) _decree, decide_, _Æ_: _rule, guide, have
control over, possess_, _B, Bo, Da_: _provide for_: _bring, deliver
(goods)_, _LL_: _have an idea, guess, forebode_, _Æ, BH, Rd_: (±) _read,
explain_, _Æ, Bl, Bo, G_: _learn by reading_: (+) _put in order_, _BH,
EC_ (ê): _help_. ['_read_,' '_rede_']

r¯ædbana (ê) m. _accessory to a murder_, LL.

r¯ædbora (ê) m. _adviser, counsellor_, Æ: _(Roman) consul_.

r¯ædda m. _robin_, WW 44^18. [rêad]

r¯ædde wk. pret. 3 sg. of r¯ædan.

r¯æde I. adj. (±) _prepared, ready, ready for riding (horse)_, _PPs_.
['_i-rede_'] II. n. (+) (ê) _trappings, armour, accoutrements,
ornaments_.

r¯ædecempa m. _horse-soldier_, WW 228^39.

r¯ædegafol n. _rent paid in one payment (in money or in kind)_, LL
118[67].

r¯ædehere m. _mounted troop, cavalry_, AO.

+r¯ædelîce = +r¯ædlîce

r¯ædelle = r¯ædelse  [[under "r¯ædels"]]

r¯ædels mf., r¯ædelse f. _enigma, 'riddle,'_ _Æ_ (ê): _consideration,
discussion_: _imagination, conjecture, interpretation_.

r¯ædemann m. _horseman_, #PPs# 32^15.

r¯æden (ê) f. _condition, terms, stipulation_, Æ: _rule, government,
direction_: _estimation_, WW.

±r¯ædend m. _controller, disposer, ruler_: _diviner_, #Sc# 75^12.

r¯ædendlic _relating to a decree_, WW.

r¯ædengewrit n. _written agreement_.

r¯ædere m. _'reader,' 'lector' (ecclesiastical order)_, _A, RB, LL_:
_scholar, diviner, expounder, interpreter_, OEG.

r¯ædescamol m. _couch, reading-desk_? WW.

r¯ædesmann m. _counsellor, adviser_: _steward_, _EC_. ['_redesman_']

r¯ædewiga m. _horse-soldier_, WW 228^38.

r¯ædfæst _resolute, wise_, Æ.

r¯ædfæstnes f. _reasonableness_, LL (306^19).

r¯ædfindende _giving counsel_, WW 383^8.

r¯ædgeðeaht n. _deliberation, consultation, counsel_.

r¯ædgifa m. _counsellor, councillor_, _Chr, LL_: _consul_. ['_redegive_']

r¯ædgift '_consulatus_,' '_senatus_,' #Gl#.

r¯ædhors n. _riding-horse_, Æ (8^233).

r¯ædhycgende _knowing, wise_, FT 26.

r¯ædic m. '_radish_,' _Lcd_ (e), _WW_. [_L._ radicem]

r¯ædin = r¯æden

r¯æding I. f. _'reading,' a reading (passage read)_, _lesson, narrative_,
_Æ, CP, RB_. II. = r¯æden

r¯ædingboc f. _lectionary, book of the lessons_.

r¯ædinggewrit = r¯ædengewrit

r¯ædinggrâd m. _steps to lectern_, NC 316.

r¯ædingscam-ol (-ul) m. _ambo, rostrum, lectern, reading-desk_, OEG (=
r¯ædescamol).

r¯ædistre f. _female reader_, #Gl#.

r¯ædlêas (ê) _ill-advised, unwise, helpless, rash, in disorder_, _Da_:
_wretched, bad, miserable_. ['_redeless_']

r¯ædlic _expedient, advisable, wise_, AO, CP. adv. -lîce _wisely,
prudently, skilfully, cunningly_, _CP, HL_: _deliberately, on purpose_:
_fully, explicitly_, GD 102^19. ['_redly_']

rædlice = hrædlice  [[form of "hrædlic"?]]

r¯ædmægen n. _productive force_, #Rim# 10? (or ? râdmægen)

rædnes = hrædnes

±r¯ædnes f. _agreement_: _decree_: _condition_.

r¯ædo f. (RB 62^15n.) = r¯æd III.

+r¯ædod _harnessed, caparisoned_, Æ (cp. +r¯æde).

rædrîpe = hrædrîpe

r¯ædsnotter _clever, sage_, #An# 473.

r¯ædðeahtende ¶ ptc. _taking counsel_.

r¯ædðeahtere m. _counsellor_, AO.

r¯ædðeahtung f. _counsel, advice_, AO 154^27.

+r¯ædung f. _decree_, WW 383^25.

rædw¯æn (AO) = hrædw¯æn (or ? r¯æd- = râd-).

r¯ædwita m. _counsellor, adviser_, DD 299.

r¯ædystre = r¯ædistre

r¯æf = rêaf

ræfen = hræfn

ræfn-an -ian (GD) _to perform, do_: _undergo_.

ræfs- = reps-

ræfter (e, ea) m. _rafter, beam_.

r¯æge (â) f. _roe_. [râ]

rægel = hrægl

r¯ægerêose f. _spinal muscles_, #Lcd#.

r¯æghâr _grey (like lichen)_, #Ruin# 10. [ragu]

rægl = hrægl

rægn = rêgn  [[error for "regn"?]]

rægolfæst = regolfæst

rægu = ragu

r¯æhte pret. 3 sg. of r¯æcan.

ræm = hræfn

-r¯æman v. â-r.

rænc = renco

ræng- = reng-

ræp pret. 3 sg. of repan.

r¯æpan (ý) (±) _to bind, fetter, capture, enslave_: _yoke together_, ÆL
31^785.

r¯æping == r¯æpling

r¯æpling m. _prisoner, criminal_, Æ. [r¯æpan]

r¯æplingweard (ê) _warder_, WW 111^10.

ræps == reps

+r¯æptan _to bind, fetter_, #Bo# 112^1.

r¯æran _to 'rear,' raise, build, create_, _BH, Gen_: _lift up, elevate,
promote_, _Bl_: _establish, begin, commit, do_, _Cr, W_; CP: _arouse,
excite, stir up_, _Rd_. [rîsan]

r¯æs m. _rush, leap, jump, running_, _Æ, Cr_: _impetus, onrush, storm,
attack_, _Æ, B_. ['_rese_']

r¯æsan _to rush, hasten_, CP: _enter on rashly_: _rush upon, assault,
attack_, _B, Bl, MH_. ['_rese_']

r¯æsbora ¶ m. _counsellor, leader, guide_.

ræscan _to vibrate, quiver_, DHy 94^1.

ræscettan _to crackle, creak, coruscate_, _DD, WW_. ['_reschette_']

r¯æsian = r¯æswian  [[under "r¯æswan"]]

ræsn n. _plank, beam, wall-plate, raising piece_, _Æ, WW_. ['_rasen_']

ræst == rest

r¯æswa ¶ m. _leader, counsellor, ruler, guide_: _chief, prince, king_.

r¯æswan, r¯æswian _to think, consider, conjecture, suspect_, CP.

r¯æswum dp. of *r¯æs? or r¯æsu? f. or *r¯æswa? _suggestion, deliberation,
counsel_, #Az# 126.

r¯æswung f. _reasoning, conjecture_, #Gl#.

ræt m. '_rat_,' _WW_ 118^41.

r¯æt pres. 3 sg. of r¯ædan.

ræð- = hræð-

ræðe = hræðe = hraðe

r¯æðe = rêðe

r¯æw I. (±) (â, êa) f. _row, line_: _succession_, _Lcd_ (â): _hedgerow_.
[v. '_rew_' and Mdf] II. = hr¯æw

+r¯æwed, +r¯æwe(n) _arranged in rows_, WW.

-râfian v. â-r.

râge = r¯æge

raggig _shaggy, bristly, rough_, OEG.

ragofinc = ragufinc

ragu (æ) f. _lichen_, Æ.

ragufinc (ea^1) m. _name of a bird, kind of finch_, WW.

râha [_Cp_] = râ

râhdêor n. _roe-buck_, _Æ, Lcd_. ['_roedeer_']

râhte = r¯æhte pret. sg. of r¯æcan.

ram = ramm

ramesa = hramsa

ramgealla m. _ram-gall (plant)_, #Lcd#.

ramm (o) m. _'ram' (sheep)_, _Æ_: (_engine of war_), _Æ, CP_: (_zodiacal
sign_), _A_.

ran pret. 3 sg. of rinnan.

rân I. n. _open robbery, rapine_. [_ON._] II. pret. 3 sg. of rînan. III.
nap. of râ.

ranc _froward, proud, overbearing_, _Æ_: _noble, brave_: _ostentatious_:
_full-grown, mature_, ÆL 35^22. ['_rank_'] adv. -lîce _boldly_, _A_:
_ostentatiously, showily_, _LL_.

rancstr¯æt f. _straight road_ (Cosijn), #Gen# 2112.

rand (o) m. _border, edge_? _KC_: (¶) _boss of shield, rim of shield_:
(¶) _shield, buckler_, _B_ (o). [v. '_rand_']

rand-bêag, -bêah m. _boss (of a shield)_, _shield_, Æ.

randburg f. _fortified city_? #Jul# 19: _shield-wall of waves (in the
Red Sea)_, #Ex# 463?

randgebeorh n. _protecting shield of waves (in the Red Sea)_, #Ex# 296.

randhæbbend § (o^1) m. _shield-bearer, warrior_.

rand-wiga ¶, -wîgend ¶, -wiggend m. _shield-warrior, man at arms_.

rânn = rân III.

râp I. m. _'rope,' cord, cable_, _Æ, Bl, Bo, JnL, VPs_; AO, CP. II.
pret. 3 sg. of rîpan.

râpgenga m. _rope-dancer_, WW 408^25.

râpincel n. _(small rope), cord, string_, #Gl#.

râplic adj. _of rope_, GPH 399.

+râr n. _roaring, howling_, MH 16^20.

râradumbla m., râredumle f. _bittern_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ rohrdommel]

rârian _to 'roar,' bellow, cry, lament, mourn_, _Æ, MH, MtL_.

rârung f. _'roaring,' howling, bellowing_, _WW_.

râs pret. 3 sg. of rîsan.

râsettan ¶ _to rage (of fire)_. [r¯æsan]

râsian _to explore_, B 2283.

ratian = hratian

raðe = hraðe

râw (_Lcd_ 89b) = r¯æw. ['_row_']

+râwan _to cut in strips_, WW.

raxan _to stretch oneself_, _Guth_. ['_rax_']

rêac pret. 3 sg. of rêocan.

rêad I. '_red_,' _Æ, Bo, CP, Gl_; _(of gold) Æ, Gen_. II. pret. 3 sg. of
rêodan.

rêada pl. _small intestines_, WW 159^38. ['_read_']

rêadbasu _reddish purple_, LL (e^2).

rêade adv. _with red colour_.

rêadfâh _red of hue_, #Ruin# 10.

rêadgoldlæfer f. _plating of (red) gold_, OEG 1070.

rêadian _to be or become 'red,'_ _Lcd, MtR_; Æ.

rêadlêaf _red-leaved_, BC (Mdf).

rêadlesc _'rubricata' (pellis)_, v. OEG 5324.

rêadnes f. '_redness_,' _BH, Bl_; Æ.

rêadstalede _red-stalked_, #Lcd# 1·378^17.

rêaf (ê) n. _plunder, booty, spoil_, _LkL, Ps_: _garment, armour,
vestment_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_reaf_,' '_reif_']

+rêafa = +rêfa

rêafere m. _robber, plunderer_, _Æ, Bo, Lk_; AO, CP. ['_reaver_']

-rêafetian v. wîn-(h)r.

rêafgend m. _robber_, KC 3·350^26.

±rêafian _to rob, plunder, take by force, waste, ravage_, _Æ, Bo, B, G,
VPs, W_: _carry off, transport_: (+) _strip_, NG. ['_reave_']

rêafigende _rapacious_, _ÆL_. ['_reaving_']

rêaflâc nm. _robbery, rapine_, _ÆH_: _plunder, booty_, _Bo_.
['_reflac_']

rêafol _rapacious_, #Lcd#.

rêafolnes f. _rapacity_, OEG.

reafter = ræfter

rêafung f. _spoliation, plundering_, AO 84^21.

reagufinc (#Gl#) = ragufinc

reahte pret. 3 sg. of reccan.

reahtigan _to dispute, discuss_, AO 130^26.

rêam I. m. _cream_, _Lcd_ 113b. ['_ream_'] II. = hrêam

rêama = rêoma

rêamwîn? n. _a drink_, OEG.

rêat pret. 3 sg. of rêotan.

rêaðe = rêðe

rêaw = r¯æw

rêawde = hrêawde

rêc m. _smoke_, _Gen, Ps_. ['_reek_']

+rec I. n. _rule, government_: _decree_: _explanation_. II. n. _tumult_,
MtL 27^24.

recan^5 _to bring, convey_? WW 420^18: _go, move, rush_.

rêcan I. pret. 3 sg. rêhte _to fumigate, expose to smoke_, _Lcd_.
[v. '_reak_'] II. = reccan II.

reccan I. _to stretch, tend, go_, _CP_: _extend, hold out to, give_: (±)
_explain, interpret_, _Æ_: _tell, narrate_, _B, Bo, G_: _correct,
reprove_: (+) _to wield (authority)_, _give judgment, decide, direct,
control_, Æ, CP: (+) _prove_: (+) _count, reckon_, Æ. ['_recche_'] II.
(rêcan) _to take care of, be interested in_, _Æ, B, Bo, Cr_: _care for_,
_Mk_: _care, desire (to do something)_, _Bo, Lcd, LL, MkL, WW_.
['_reck_']

recce- (CP), recci- = rêce-

-recce v. earfoð-r.

+reccelic = +reclic

rêccelîest (e^3, i^3) f. _recklessness, carelessness, negligence_, CP.

reccend m. _ruler, guide_, Æ, AO.

reccenddôm, reccendôm m. _rule, governance, oversight_, CP.

reccenes = recednes

reccere m. _teacher, ruler, director_, CP: _interpreter_, MtL p2^13.

reccing f. _narrative_, ÆL 30^375.

reced nm. _building, house, palace, hall_.

recedlic _palatial_, WW (æ).

±recednes f. _narrative, history_, _Æ_: _interpretation_: _direction,
correction_. ânfeald +r. _prose_.

recedôm = reccendôm  [[under "reccenddôm"]]

rêcel (v. MP 171) = rêcels

rêcelêas _'reckless,' careless, negligent_, _BH, Bo, Cp, W_.

rêcelêasian _to neglect_, _W_. ['_reckless_']

rêcelêaslîce adv. _heedlessly, carelessly, inattentively, negligently_,
_CP_ (rêcce-), _HL_. ['_recklessly_']

rêcelêasnes f. _'recklessness,' carelessness, negligence_, _LL, W_; Æ.

rêcelîestu = rêccelîest

rêcels (î, ý) m. _incense, frankincense_, _Gl, Lcd_; Æ. ['_rekels_';
rêc]

rêcelsbûc (ý) m. _censer_, WW.

rêcelsfæt (i) n. _censer_, _Æ_. ['_rekelfat_']

rêcelsian _to perfume with incense_, #Lcd#.

rêcelsrêoce f. _burning of incense_, FBO 75^19.

recen _ready, prompt, quick_, _Wa_: _rapid, violent_, _Cr, Ps_.
['_reken_']

recendôm = reccendôm  [[under "reccenddôm"]]

recene (i, y) adv. _instantly, at once, quickly_, Æ.

+recenian _to explain, recount, relate_, _Ex_ 525. ['_reckon_']

recenlîce (o^2) adv. _immediately, forthwith_, _Gl_. ['_rekenly_']

recennes = reccenes

rêcetung (#VPs#) = hr¯æcetung

+reclic _circumstantial, detailed, ample_, CP 193^15#c#. adv. -lîce
_directly, straight_: _methodically_.

+recnes f. _direction, inclination_. #EPs# 138^3.

recnian _to pay_? Ct.

recon I. _remuneration_, #Gl#. II. == recen

recse = risce  [[under "risc"]]

recyd = reced

rêd I. = r¯æd. II. pret. 3 sg. of r¯ædan.

red- = ræd-

rêd- = r¯æd-

rêde = rêðe

redestân m. _'synophites,' red ochre_? WW 47^15.

-rêdian v. â-r.

rêdon pret. pl. of r¯ædan.

±rêfa (usu. +) m. _high official_, _'reeve,' steward, sheriff, count
('comes'), prefect, consul_, _BH, OET, Mk, MH_.

+rêfærn n. _court house_, MH 124^13.

+rêfland v. sundorgerêfland.

+rêfm¯æd f. _reeve's meadow_, Ct.

+rêfmann m. _official, courtier_, GD 308·315.

refsan = ræfsan  [[redirected to "repsan"]]

+rêfscipe m. _reeve's office, stewardship_, Æ.

+rêfscîr f. _steward's office, prefecture_, OEG.

refter (ê?) = ræfter

regellic = regollic

regen- = regn-, rên-

regn (rên; _Æ, MH_) m. '_rain_,' _VPs_: _showers of rain_, _Bl_.

regn- = rên-

regnan = rînan

regnheard _very hard_, B 326. [_ON._ regin]

regnian I. _to 'rain,'_ _MtR_ 5^45. II. = rênian

regnðêof ¶ m. _downright thief_.

regol (eo) m. _rule, regulation, canon, law, standard, pattern_, Æ:
_monastic code of rules_, Æ: _ruler (instrument)_. [_L._ regula]

regolbryce m. _breach of rules_, W 166^22.

regolfæst (æ) _rigid, strict, adhering to monastic rules_, #Men# 44.

regolian _to draw lines with a ruler_, NC 316.

regollagu f. _monastic law_, LL 266[25].

regollic _according to rules, canonical, regular_. adv. -lîce.

regollîf (eo) m. _life according to ecclesiastical rules_.

regolsticca m. _rule, ruler (instrument)_, Æ.

regolðêaw m. _discipline of (monastic) rule_, A 10·144^125.

regolweard m. _regulator, director, ruler, abbot, provost_.

regul == regol

reht (#VPs#) = riht

rehte pret. 3 sg. of reccan.

rêhte pret. 3 sg. of rêcan II.

relicgang m. _visiting of relics_: _procession of relics_.

reliquias mpl. _relics of saints_ (reliquium is used in sg.).

reliquiasôcn f. _visit to a shrine_, MFH 172.

rêman = rýman

remian _to mend_, v. NC 317.

remm- = hremm-

remn = hræfn

rempan _to be hasty, precipitate_, CP 149^12.

rên (AO, CP) == regn

+rên (î) n. _ornament_, CP: _building_, NG.

rênboga m. '_rainbow_,' _Æ_.

renco (æ) f. _pride, ostentation_.

rendan _to 'rend,' tear, cut down_, _Gl_.

rendegn m. _house-officer_, Erf 1137. [ærn, ðegn]

rêndropa m. '_raindrop_,' _Lcd_ 3·278^18.

rene = ryne

±rêne = ±rýne

renel (#KGl#) = rynel

reng = regn

renge (y) f. _spider, spider's web_. [_L._ aranea]

rengwyrm (æ) m. _intestinal worm_, #Lcd#.

±rênian _to prepare_: (+) _arrange, set in order, mend, set (trap)_: (+)
_adorn_. +r. tô bismere _humiliate, degrade_, AO. [*regnian; _Goth._
raginôn]

rêniend m. _arranger_. #El# 880?

rênig (_Lcd_), rênlic (Æ) '_rainy_.'

+renned '_coagulatus_,' #EPs# 67^16.

rênscûr m. '_rain-shower_,' _Æ_.

rênsnægl m. _snail_, OEG 23^20.

+rênung (regn-) f. _arranging_, WW 371^19.

rênwæter n. '_rain-water_,' _Lcd_.

renweard m. _house-guardian_, B 770. [ærn]

renwyrm m. _earthworm_, _WW_. ['_rainworm_']

rêo I. f. (obl. cases rêon) _covering, rug, blanket, mantle_. [rûh] II.
= hrêoh

rêoc _savage, furious_, B 122.

rêocan I. sv^2 intr. _to emit smoke, steam, 'reek,'_ _Lcd, Ps_; Æ:
_stink_. II. (WW 244^36) = rêcan

rêocende (ê) _smoking, steaming_, _Æ, Jud, MtL_. ['_reeking_']

rêod I. _'red,' ruddy_, _Æ, Erf, MH_. ['_reod_'] II. n. _red colour_,
WW. III. = hrêod

rêodan^2 _to redden, stain with blood_: (¶) _kill_?

reodian _to sift_? #El# 1239.

rêodian = rêadian

rêodmûða m. _'faseacus' (bird)_, WW 234^25.

rêodnæsc (WW 38^13) ?= rêadlesc

rêofan^2 (only in pp. rofen) _to rend, break_, #Ex# 463.

reogol == regol

reohhe f. _'ray,' thornback_? WW 181^6.

+rêohnung = +rênung

reoht = riht

rêol = hrêol

reoma = rima

rêoma (êa) m. _membrane, ligament_. [_Ger._ riemen]

rêon I. = rêowon pret. pl. of rôwan. II. v. rêo.

rêone asm. of rêo.

±rêonian _to conspire, plot_, Æ.

rêonig ¶ _mournful, sad_: _gloomy_.

rêonigmôd ¶ _mournful, weary_.

±rêonung f. _whispering, muttering, conspiracy_, Æ: _astrology_, OEG.
[rûn]

reopa m. _bundle of corn, sheaf_, _VPs_. ['_reap_']

reopan (#VPs#) = repan

reopian = ripian  [[headword spelled "rîpian"]]

±reord ¶ I. fn. _voice_, _B, Cr, Ps_: _language, speech_, ÆL.
['_rerde_'] II. f. sustenance, _food_: _meal, feast_. III. pret. 3 sg.
of r¯ædan.

reordan = reordian II.

reordberend ¶ m. _man_.

reordhûs n. _eating room, refectory_, MkL 14^15.

reordian I. _to speak, discourse_, _B, Cr, Gen_: _read_. ['_rerde_'] II.
(±) _to feed, refresh, entertain, feast_.

+reordnes f. _feasting, banquet_.

±reordung f. _refection, meal_.

+reordunghûs n. _refectory_, WW 328^32.

+reordungtîd f. _mealtime_, GD 145^13.

reosan _'pissli,' name of a plant_? WW 300^5.

+rêosan = +hrêosan

-rêose v. r¯æge-r.

rêost _rest (part of a plough)_, WW.

rêotan^2 ¶ _to weep, mourn, wail_.

rêote v. rêtu.

rêotig ¶ _mournful, sad, tearful_.

rêow I. = rêo (hrêoh). II. pret. 3 sg. of rôwan.

rêowlic = hrêowlic

rêowot = rêwet

repan^5 _to reap_, #Chr#.

repel m. _staff, rod_, GD 20^26 (v. ES 37·192).

reppan = hreppan  [[under "hrepian"]]

reps m. _response (in a church service)_, Æ, RB. [_L._ responsorium]

repsan _to reprove, blame_, #Gl#.

repsung (æ) f. _a division of the night_: _reproving_. [= *ræfsung]

repung = hrepung

rêran = r¯æran

+rerding = +reordung

resce = risce  [[under "risc"]]

rêsele f. _answer, solution_, #Rd# 40^28. [= *r¯æsele]

rêsian = r¯æswian  [[under "r¯æswan"]]

+resp n. _blame_. [= *+reps]

rest (æ) f. _'rest,' quiet, repose, sleep_, _Æ, Bo, BH, Cr, VPs_: (±)
_resting-place, bed, couch_, _Bl, Chr, MtL, MH, VPs_: _grave_.

±resta f. _bedfellow, consort, wife_, Æ.

restan (absol. and refl.) _to 'rest,' repose_, _Æ, Bl, Chr, Lcd, LL_:
(+) (w. g.) _rest from, remain, lie_, _Æ, An, B, MkL_.

rêstan _to rejoice, exult_? #PPs# 113^4.

restbedd n. _bed, couch_, #PPs# 131^3.

rest-dæg (æ), reste-, resten- (Æ) m. _day of rest, Sabbath day_, _CP,
Mt_. ['_restday_']

restengêar n. _year of rest from work_, Æ.

restgemâna m. _cohabitation_.

resthûs n. _chamber_, #APs#, BH.

restlêas _'restless,' without rest_, RB 121^14.

+restscipe m. _cohabitation_, BH 76^27.

rêsung (CP) = r¯æswung

±rêtan _to delight, gladden, cheer, console, comfort_, CP. [rôt]

rêtend m. _comforter_, W 257^4.

rêtu f. (only in d. rêote) _joy_, B 2457.

reðe _righteous, just_, #PPs# (or ?= rêðe).

rêðe _(of persons) fierce, cruel, violent, harsh, severe_, _Æ, B, BH_:
_(of things) terrible, dreadful_, _Bl, Bo, CP_: _zealous_, CP.
['_rethe_']

rêðegian = rêðian

reðehygdig _right-minded_, #Alm# 2.

reðeman m. _usurer_ (GK), #PPs# 108^11. [_Goth._ raðjo?]

rêðemôd ¶ _savage, cruel, fierce, indignant_.

rêðen ? _wild_, ÆL 10^102.

rêð-ian, -igian _to rage, be fierce_, Æ.

rêðig _fierce_, WW 402^23.

rêðigmôd _savage, fierce_, #Met# 25^17.

rêðlic _fierce, cruel, deadly_. adv. -lîce _violently_.

rêðnes f. _cruelty, severity, harshness_, _Bl, CP_; AO: _savageness,
ferocity_, _BH, Lcd_; CP: _zeal_, CP. ['_rethness_']

±rêðra m. _rower, sailor_, #Gl#.

+rêðre _ready_, CP 306^15.

±rêðru np. _oars_.

rêðscipe m. _fury, anger_, WW 245^17.

rêwet, rêwut n. _rowing_, Æ: _rowing-boat, vessel_, Æ. [rôwan]

riaht (K) = riht I.

rib, ribb n. '_rib_,' _Æ, Cp, MH, Soul_; AO.

ribbe f. _hound's-tongue, ribwort_, _Ep, Lcd, WW_. ['_rib_']

ribbspâcan np. _'rib-spokes,' the brisket_? (BT), WW 265^24.

rîca m. _influential man, ruler_, Æ.

rîcan (BDS 16^367) = rêcan (*riecan)

rîcceter, rîccetere (Æ) = rîceter

rîce I. _strong, powerful_, _Da_; #Lcd#: _great, mighty, of high rank_,
_Æ, BH, MH_; AO, CP: '_rich_,' _Æ, BH, Bo, Lk_. II. n. _rule, reign,
power, might, authority, empire_, _Æ, Bl, Cr, MH_; AO. fôn tô rîce _to
ascend the throne_: _kingdom, nation, diocese_, _B_; AO, CP: _reign
(period of time)_. ['_riche_']

rîcedôm n. _kingly rule_, W 125^9. ['_richdom_']

rîcels = rêcels

ricen- = recen-

rîceter, rîcetere n. _force, might, power, rule, dominion, glory,
greatness_, CP: _ambition_, Æ: _tyranny, oppression, violence_.

ricg, ricig = hrycg

rîclic _sumptuous_, AS 38^3. adv. -lîce _powerfully_, _Æ, CP_:
_sumptuously_, _Lk_. ['_richly_']

ricone = recene

rics = risc

rîcsere m. _ruler_, DR 113^3.

rîcsian _to bear rule, reign, govern, tyrannize_, Æ, AO, CP: _dominate,
prevail_.

rîcsiend m. _ruler_, DR 102^8.

rîcsung f. _domination_, DR 174^10.

-rîda v. brand-r.  [[headword spelled "brandrida"]]

rîdan^1 (±) _to 'ride,'_ _B, BH, Mt_; AO: _move about, swing, rock, ride
(at anchor)_, _B, Bo_: _float, sail_, _Gen_: _chafe (of fetters)_; (+)
_ride over, occupy (a country)_, _seize_: (+) _ride up to_.

ridda m. _rider, man on horseback, horseman, horse-soldier_, Æ.

riddere = rîdere

-rîdel v. for(e)-r.  [[under "forrîdel"]]

rîdend m. _rider, cavalier_.

rîdere m. _'rider,' trooper, knight_, _Chr_ 1085#l#.

ridesoht f? _fever_, NG. [hrið? suht?]

ridon pret. pl. of rîdan.

rîdusende _swinging_, #Gl#.

rîdwiga m. _horse-soldier_, WW 110^28.

rîece = rîce

rîeht == riht

rif = hrif

rîf I. _fierce, ravenous_. II. _generous_, #Kl#.

+rif n. _seizing, catch (of fish)_: _number caught_.

+rîf _garment_, v. NC 295.

-rife v. hege-r.

rifelede _wrinkled_, _OEG_ 18b^78. ['_rivelled_']

rifeling m. _shoe or sandal of raw hide_, _WW_ 125. ['_rivelling_']

+rifian _to wrinkle_, ÆH 1·614^14.

rift, rifte (y) n. _cloak, veil, curtain_, _Æ, Cp, MtL_. ['_rift_']

rifter m. _reaping-hook, sickle, scythe_, #Gl#.

riftre, riftere (y) m. _reaper_, Æ.

rige == ryge

rignan = rînan

rîhsian = rîcsian

±riht I. (e, eo, y) n. (_what is straight_), _'right,' equity, justice,
law, canon, rule_, _Æ, B, Bo, Bl, BH, CP, Ct_: _cause, legal action_, Æ:
_a right, privilege_, _Bo, CP, Gen, LL_: _correctness, truth_. on r.;
mid rihte _rightly, correctly, properly_: _what is due, duty,
obligation_, _CP_ (y), _Gen_: _reckoning, account_. II. (æ, e, y) adj.
_straight, erect, direct_, _BH, Bl, Lcd, VPs_: _'right,' proper, fair,
just, equitable, lawful, permissible_, _Bl, Bo, Lk, W_: _true, correct_,
_Bl, WW_: _fitting, appropriate_, _BH, LL_: _real, genuine_, _Æ, BH,
Bl_: _right (as opposed to left)_.

rihtæðelcwên f. _lawful wife_, W 298^18.

rihtæðelo (y) npl. _true nobility_.

riht¯æw f. _lawful wedlock_, W: _lawful wife_, LL.

±rihtan (e, y) _to set right, correct, amend_, _Bl, LL, TC_; Æ: _guide,
govern, direct, rule_, _Bl, Bo_: _set up, restore, replace, erect_,
_Gen_. ['_right_']

rihtândaga m. _proper (fixed) day_, LL.

rihtandswaru f. _retort, reproof_, #PPs# 37^14.

rihtcynecynn (y^1) n. _legitimate royal family_, AO(y^1).

rihtcyning m. _lawful king_, BH 360^14.

rihtcynn n. _true stock_, W 13^6.

rihtdônde ptc. _doing what is right_, #Bl#.

rîhte adv. _'right,' due, straight (of direction, as in right on, due
east)_, _outright_, _CP, Met_: _precisely, exactly, just_, _AO, Bl, Bo,
Ps_: _rightly, duly, well, correctly, truly, properly, fairly, justly_,
_B, Bl, Lk_: _directly, immediately_, Æ. ð¯ær rihte _thereupon,
straightway_.

+rihte n. _right, due_, _Æ, Chr_ (1074#l#): _religious rite, office_,
ÆL. +rihtu pl. _last offices_. on +r. _straight on_. up on +r.
_upright_. ['_i-riht_']

rihtebred n. _measure, rule, square_, WW.

rihtend m. _director, leader, guide_.

rihtendebyrdnes f. _right order_, NC 317.

rihtere m. _director, ruler_, _Bo_. ['_righter_']

rihtes (e) adv. _right, straight_, KC 3·392^6.

rihtfædrencynn (e, y) n. _direct paternal descent or pedigree_.

rihtfæsten n. _properly ordained fast_, LL 132[8].

rihtfæstendæg m. _properly appointed fast-day_, Æ.

rihtfæstentîd f. _duly appointed time of fasting_, Æ.

rihtfremmende (y) ¶ _acting rightly_.

rihtful _'rightful,' honourable_, #Chr# 1100#l#.

rihtgefêg n. _proper joint_, GD 248^26.

rihtgefremed _catholic, orthodox_, BH 456^15.

rihtgegylda m. _duly appointed member of a guild_, TC 606^14.

rihtgehâtan^7 _to pledge oneself, swear_, #RPs# 14^4.

rihtgehîwan pl. _lawfully married persons_, LL 22n16.

rihtgelêafful _orthodox_.

rihtgelêaflîce adv. _in an orthodox manner_, CM 1167.

rihtge-lýfed, -lêfed ptc. _having the right faith, orthodox, catholic_.

rihtgelýfende _believing rightly, faithful_, #Bl#.

rihtgemet n. _proper measure_, NC 317.

rihtgesamhîwan pl. _lawfully married persons_, LL 22[38].

rihtgescêad n. _right understanding_, GD 56^2.

rihtgeset _duly appointed, canonical_, CM 412.

rihtgesetednes f. _right ordinance_, NC 317.

rihtgeðancod _right-minded_, #LPs#.

rihtgewitt (y) n. _right mind_, MH 192^22.

rihtgewittig _in one's right mind_, GD 245^22.

rihtgifu f. _irrevocable gift_, LL 366[81]; 385.

rihth¯æmed n. _lawful wedlock_, CP (y).

rihthâmscyld m. _main entrance to a homestead_? LL 5[32] (v. ANS
115·389).

rihthâmsôcn f. _actual_ 'hâmsôcn' (v. hâmsôcn), LL 614[49,58].

rihthand f. _right hand_, #Nic# 492; 508.

rihthandd¯æda m. _actual perpetrator_, LL 188[1,3].

rihtheort _righteous, just_, #CPVPs#.

rihthîwa m. _lawful consort_, CP (y).

rihthlâford m. _rightful lord_, LL.

rihthlâforddôm m. _lawful authority_, #Chr# 918#c#.

rihthlâfordhyldo (e^5) f. _loyalty_, W.

±rihtl¯æcan _to put right, rectify, set in order_, _RB, W_.
['_rightleche_']

rihtl¯æce m. _duly qualified physician_, W 12^12.

rihtl¯æcung (y) f. _criticism, correction_, Æ, CP.

rihtlagu f. _regular legal ordinance_, W.

rihtlic (y) _right, proper, just, fit, righteous_, Æ: _adapted, fitted_.
adv. -lîce _justly, uprightly, virtuously_, _Æ, Bl_: _properly_,
_'rightly,' regularly_, _BH_: _correctly, precisely_, A, CP (y).

rihtlîcettere m. _downright hypocrite_, W 54^14.

rihtlîf n. _right life, regular union (of married people)_, #Lcd#
3·176^22.

rihtlîflâd m. _right way of life_, GD 336^1.

rihtliðlic _articulate_, WW 355^8.

rihtmêdrencynn (e^1, oe^2) n. _direct mother's line_, OET 651.

rihtmêterfers n. _correct hexameter verse_, A 8·314.

rihtmunuc m. _true monk_, RB 73^19.

rihtnes (e) f. _'rightness,' rectitude, equity_, _Ps_:
_perpendicularity, straightness_, _WW_: _reckoning, account_,
_MtL_ (e): (+) _correction_.

rihtnorðanwind m. _north wind_, AO 17^17 (y).

rihtraciend m. _expounder of righteousness (the preacher,
Ecclesiastes)_, GD 264^27.

rihtracu (y) f. _correct account_, TC 170^4: _right reason_, GD 262.

+rihtreccan _to guide, direct_, AS 26^7.

rihtregul m. _right rule, canon_, OEG 5304.

rihtryne m. _right or straight course_.

rihtscîr (LL 252^21) = rihtscriftscîr

rihtscrîfend m. _jurisconsult, lawyer_, WW.

rihtscriftscîr f. _properly assigned district of a confessor_.

rihtscylling m. _shilling of sterling money_, LL (222^7).

rihtscytte (y) _sure of aim_, #Cra# 51.

rihtsmêaung (e^1) f. _right reasoning or argument_, MtL p9^10.

rihtstefn f. _ordinary voice_, GD 28^28.

riht-tîd f., -tima m. _proper time_.

riht-ðêow, -ðêowa m. _lawful slave_, GD 180^6.

rihtung f. _action of guiding aright, direction, order, rule, guidance_,
_Æ, RB_: _correction, reproof_, Æ: _body of rights, privilege_?
_privileged district_? #Chr# 983#e#: _'regularis' (in computation)_.
['_righting_']

rihtungðrêd m. _plumb-line_, WW 150^41.

rihtweg m. _right way_, W.

rihtwer m. _lawful husband_: _legally correct_ 'wergild,' LL 466; 467.

rihtwestende m. _extreme western limit_, AO 8^32 (y^1).

rihtwîf n. _lawful wife_, LL 348[54,1].

rihtwillende _wishing to do right_, #Bo# 11^17.

rihtwîs _'righteous,' just_, _Bl, Bo, Chr_; CP: _right, justifiable_,
_Bl_.

rihtwîsend m. _Sadducee_, Mt 3^7.

rihtwîsian _to make 'righteous,' justify_, _Lk, VPs_; Æ: _direct aright,
rule_.

rihtwîslic _righteous_, CP (y). adv. -lîce _rightly, reasonably_, _Bo_.
['_righteously_']

rihtwîsnes f. _'righteousness,' justice_, _Mt_: _rightness, reason_:
_righteous acts_, _Æ_.

+rihtwîsung f. _justification_.

rihtwrîtere m. _correct writer_, #Gl#.

rihtwuldriende _orthodox_, BH 310^33#b#.

rihtwyrðe _proper, fitting_, AS 13^25.

rihtymbren n. _duly appointed Ember tide_, W 117.

rihtymbrendagas mp. _duly appointed Ember days_, W 117.

rîm- = hrîm-

±rîm n. _number, counting, reckoning_, _VPs_; Æ, AO, CP. ['_rime_']

rima m. _'rim,' verge, border, coast_, _Cp, WW_.

rîman (±) _to count, number_, _AO, Ps_; Æ: _tell, enumerate, relate_,
CP: _account, esteem as_. ['_rime_']

rîmâð m. _oath by a number of persons_, LL 154[9].

+rîmbôc _calendar_, ÆH 1·98^28.

±rîmcræft m. _arithmetic_: _calendar_, ÆL 10^1.

rîmcræftig _skilled in reckoning_.

rîmcræftiga m. _one skilful at figures_, A 8·301^33.

-rîme v. earfoð-r.

rîmforst = hrîmforst

rîmge-tæl, -tel ¶ n. _number_.

rimpan v. +rumpen.

rimpel _wrinkle_. [cf. hrympelle]

  [[From first edition. The entry for "hrympelle" has the same
  definition, with bracketed cross-reference [?= rimpel].]]

rîmre m. _reckoner, calculator_, A 8·307^34.

rîmtæl = rîmgetæl

rîmtalu f. _number_, #El# 820.

+rîn (NG) = +rên

rînan^1 (and wv.) impers. and intr. _to rain_, (impers.) _Æ, Bl_;
(intr.) _Bl, Lk, VPs_. ['_rine_'; regn]

+rînan = +hrînan

rinc m. _man, warrior, hero_, _B, Cr, Met_. ['_rink_']

rincgetæl n. _number of men_, #Ex# 234.

rincsetl (#HGl# 489) = hringsetl

rind, rinde f. _'rind,' bark, outside_, _Bo, Cr, Lcd_; CP: _crust_, _Æ_.

-rindan, -rindran v. be-r.

rindeclifer f. _wood-pecker_? _nut-hatch_? WW 427^29.

rinden _of bark_, GPH 390.

rindlêas _having no bark_, WW 190^31.

rîne = rýne

ring = bring

rîning = hrîning

±rinnan^3 _to 'run,' flow_, _Cp, Cr, Ps, Sat_: (+) _run together, blend,
coagulate_. [= iernan]

rinnelle f. _runnel, rivulet, stream_. [rynele?]
  [[headword spelled "rynel"]]

±rîp n. _harvest_, _BH, Chr, Mt_: _cut corn, sheaf_: _ripeness,
maturity_, #PPs# 118^147. ['_ripe_,' '_reap_']

rîpan I. (±) (êo, ý) _to 'reap,'_ _Æ, AO, Chr, CP, G_. II. (AS 10^5) =
rîpian

rîpe _'ripe,' mature_, _BH, Bo_.

rîpemann m. _reaper_, _MtL_ (hr-). ['_reapman_']

rîpere m. '_reaper_,' _Mt_.

rîpian _to become 'ripe,' ripen_, _A, Æ_.

rîpîsern n. _sickle_, MtLR 4^29.

rîpnes f. _'ripeness,' harvest_, _LPs_.

riptere = riftere  [[under "riftre"]]

rîptîma m. _time of harvest_, _Mt_. ['_reaptime_']

rîpung f. _ripening, ripeness, maturity_, _A, RB, VPs_. ['_riping_']

+rîs n. _fury_, #Gl#.

±rîsan^1 I. (usu. +) _to 'rise,' stand up_, _Ps_: _be fit, be proper_,
_Æ, Gu_. ['_irise_'] II. _to seize, carry off_.

risc, risce (e; = y) f. '_rush_,' _Cp_; Mdf. [_L._]

riscbedd n. _bed of rushes_, _EC_. [v. '_rush_']

riscen _made of rushes_, _Æ_. ['_rushen_']

risclêac n. _rush leek, rush garlic_, WW 356^36.

riscðýfel m. _rush-bed_, Ct, #Gl#.

risen- = risn-

+risen _seizure_, #Guth# 78^5. [rîsan]

rîsende? _rapacious_, #Bl# 225^17.

+risenlic _convenient, suitable, becoming_, AO, CP. adv. -lîce.

risiendum '_odorato_'? OEG 23^4.

±risne _fit, meet, proper, convenient_.

+risnes f. _congruity_, WW 383^16.

+risnian _to agree, accord_, WW 336^37.

+risnu np. _what is fitting, due, dignities_, AO.

risoda m. _rheum_, #Lcd# 2·282^11.

rît pres. 3 sg. of rîdan.

rið f. _favour, indulgence_, #Sc# 224^7.

rîð fm., rîðe? f. _rivulet, stream_, _Æ, Bo, CP_; Mdf. ['_rithe_']

rîðfald m. _cattle-pen, cow-shed_, WW 195^34. [hrîð-]

rîðig n. _streamlet_, Mdf.

riðða = ryðða

rix (_Æ_) = risc

rîxian (Æ) = rîcsian

rô = rôw II.

roc n. _what is chewed, cud_, WW.

rocc m. _over-garment, rochet_. [_Ger._ rock]

roccettan, rocettan _to eructate, belch forth, utter_, NG, #VPs#.

roccian _to rock (a child)_, #Kl# 101^108.

rôd f. _'rood,' cross, gallows_, _Æ, Ct, G, MH_; CP: _rood (land
measure)_, _plot of land of a square rod_, _BC_ (Mdf).

rôdbîgenga m. _worshipper of the cross_, WW 216^16.

rôdbora m. _cross-bearer_, GPH 389.

rodd m? _'rod,' stick (to beat with)_, _HL_ 15^110 (v. late).

rôdegealga m. _cross_, MP 1·610.

rôdehengen f. _hanging, crucifixion_, Æ.

roder = rodor

rôdewyrðe _deserving hanging_, HL 18^389.

+rôdfæstnian _to crucify_.

rodor (a) m., gs. rod(o)res _ether, sky, heavens, firmament_, Æ, CP.

rodorbeorht _heaven-bright_, #Da# 369.

rodorcyning ¶ m. _king of heaven_.

rodorlic _of the heavens, heavenly, celestial_, Æ.

rodorlîhtung (roder-) f. _dawn_, #LPs#.

rodorstôl (a^1) m. _heavenly throne_, #Gen# 749.

rodortorht _heavenly-bright_, #Gen# 1416.

rodortungol n. _star of heaven_, #Gen# 1667.

rôdwurðiend m. _cross-worshipper_, #HGl# 403^30.

roeðe (Cp, NG) = rêðe

rôf ¶ _vigorous, strong, brave, noble, renowned_.

rofen pp. of rêofan.

rôflêas = hrôflêas

rogian _to flourish_, #GnE# 119.

rôhte pret. 3 sg. of rêcan.

rom = ramm

Rôm, Rômeburg f. _Rome_, AO.

Rômân f. _Italy_.

Rômân-e, -an pl. _Romans_, AO.

rômânisc _Roman_, Æ, AO.

Rôm-feoh, -gesceot (_LL_) n., -penig (_LL, W_) m. _'Rome-penny',
'Romescot', Peter's pence_.

rômian (w. g.) _to possess_? #Gen# 350.

romm = ramm

Rômwalh (u^1) m. _inhabitant of Rome_. [wealh]

Rôm-ware (AO), -waran pl. _inhabitants of Rome, Romans_.

rond = rand

rop I.? _broth_, WW 272^9. II. = ropp

rôp _liberal_, #Rd# 58^3.

rôpnes f. _liberality_, WW.

ropp m. _intestines_, _Lcd, WW_ (hr-). ['_rope_']

ropwærc m. _colic_, WW 211^12.

rôrend = rôwend

rôsbedd _rose-bed_, OEG 23^8.

rôse, rose f. '_rose_' _A, Æ, Bl, Bo, MH_. [_L._ rosa]

rôsen _made of roses_, _Lcd_: _rose-coloured, rosy_, _Æ, ZDA_.
['_rosen_']

rôsig _rosy_, ÆH 2·334^30.

+rôsod _roseate_, OEG 3278.

rost = rust  [[headword spelled "rûst"]]

+rostian _to roast, dry_, WW.

rot = hrot

rôt _glad, cheerful, bright_: _noble, excellent_.

rôt(e)? '_root_,' _NC_ 318.

rôtfæst _(root-fast), firmly established_, #Chr# 1127. [_ON._ rôt]

rôthwîl f. _time of refreshing_, #PPs#.

rotian '_to rot_', _putrefy_, _Æ, CP, Lcd_.

rôtlîce _gladly, cheerfully_, BH 348^3.

rôtnes f. _gladness, cheerfulness_, DR: _refuge, protection_, #Pss#.

rôtsian _to make sad, afflict_, CP 417^9.

rôtsung f. _refuge, protection, comfort_, #EPs# 9^10.

rotung f. _corruption, ulcer_, WW 114^14. [rotian]

rôðer I. m. _rower, sailor_, CP. [rôwan] II. = rôðor

roðhund m. _mastiff_, WW. [ryðða]

rôðor n., gs. rôðres _oar, scull_, _CP, WW_. ['_rudder_']

rôðra = rêðra

rôw I. _quiet, calm, gentle, soft, mild_, CP. II. f. _quietness, rest_.
[_Ger._ ruhe]

±rôwan^7 pret. pl. rêowon, rêon _to go by water_, _'row,' sail, swim_,
_LkL (hr-)_, _WW_; Æ.

rôwend m. _rower_, CP: _sailor_, Æ.

rôwett = rêwet

rôwnes f. _rowing_, BH 384^22.

rôwung f. '_rowing_,' _NG_.

rudduc m. _robin_, _WW_. ['_ruddock_']

rûde I. m. _scabbiness, scab_, WW 161^14 (= *hrûda? A 30·253). II. f.
_rue_. [_L._ ruta]

rudig _rubicund, 'ruddy,'_ _OEG_ 2932.

rudon pret. pl. of rêodan.

rudu f. _red colour_, _ApT_: _ruddy complexion_, _WW_: _red cosmetic_,
_ÆL_. ['_rud_']

rues = ryges gs. of ryge.

rûg = rûh

rugern m. _month of rye-harvest, August_? LL 12 Pro.

rûh gs. rûwes '_rough_,' _Guth, Rd_; Æ: _coarse (of cloth)_: _hairy,
shaggy_, _Æ_: _undressed, untamed_, _WW_.

ruhha? m. _ray (fish)_, NC 324 (suhha). ['_rough_']

rûm I. adj. (±) _roomy, wide, long, spacious, ample, large, liberal_,
_B, Bo, Mt, VPs_; Æ, CP: _unfettered, open, unrestricted, loose_:
_noble, august_. II. m. (±) _space (extent or time), 'room,'_ _Gen, Lk_:
_scope, opportunity_, _B, Met_. on +rum _at large, apart_.

+ruma ¶ m. _space, place_.

rûman = rýman

rûme (once +) adv. _widely, spaciously, roomily, amply, liberally,
extensively, abundantly_, _Gen, Lcd_: _light-heartedly_: _in detail_,
#Jul# 314. ['_room_']

rûmed- = rûmmôd-

rûmgâl _revelling in release from confinement (Noah's dove)_, #Gen#
1466. adv. -lîce _widely_, NC 318.

rûmgifa (eo^2) m. _bountiful giver_, BH 194^33.

rûmgiful (y^2) _bountiful_, Æ, CP.

rûmgifulnes f. _liberality, bounty, profusion_, Æ.

rûmheort _large-hearted, generous_: _free from care_.

rûmheortnes f. _liberality_.

rûmian _to become clear of obstructions_, _Lcd_ 1·76^13. ['_room_']

rûmlic _benign, liberal_: _plentiful_, Æ. adv. +rûmlîce _at large,
fully, kindly, liberally, abundantly_, _Æ, Bl, MtL_. ['_roomly_']

rûmmôd _liberal, lavish, kind_, CP.

rûmmôdlic _ample, large, full, liberal, gracious_. adv. -lîce.

rûmmôdnes f. _large-heartedness, liberality, kindness_.

rûmnes f. _breadth, abundance_, Æ.

rûmôd = rûmmôd

rûmor adv. comp. _still further_.

+rumpen _twisted, wrinkled_? WW 366^40.

rûmwelle _spacious_, MtL 7^13.

rûn f. _mystery, secrecy, secret_, _El, JnL_: _counsel, consultation_,
_B, KC, Wa_: _(secret) council_: _runic character, letter_, _BH_:
_writing_, _An, Da_. ['_roun_']

+rûna m. _councillor_, #Gl#.

rûncofa m. _chamber of secrets, breast, bosom_, #Met# 22^59.

rûncræftig _skilled in mysteries_, #Da# 734.

rûnere m. _whisperer, tale-bearer_, _Æ_. ['_rouner_']

rûnian _to whisper, murmur, talk secrets, conspire_, _Æ, Ps, Sol_.
['_round_']

rûniende _whispering_, WW 441. ['_rouning_']

runl _foul_? _running_? #Lcd# 3·36^17. [?= *hrunol]

rûnlic _mystical_, MtL p5^11.

-runn v. cýs-gerunn.

+runnen pp. of +rinnan.

+runnenes f. _that has been cooled or congealed_, GPH 398.

rûnstæf m. _runic letter, rune_, _Æ, B_. ['_rune-stave_']

rûnung f. _whispering, wheedling_, _Æ_. ['_rouning_']

rûnwita ¶ m. _private adviser, counsellor, wise man_.

rûst m. '_rust_,' _Cp, MtL, RB_: _moral canker_, _CP, HL_.

rûstig '_rusty_,' AO 251^21.

rûte = rûde

rûwa m., rûwe f. _covering, tapestry_.

rûwes v. rûh.

rûxlan _to make a noise_, MtR 9^23. [hrûxl]

ryc- = rec-

rýc- = rêc-

rýcð pres. 3 sg. of rêocan.

rýd (LL 192, 2#b#) = râd I.

-ryddan, -rydran v. â-r.

+rýd(e)? _prepared, ready_.

ryden n. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 122a.

rýderian v. â-r.

rýe = rýhe

rýfe _'rife,' frequent_, _Lcd_ (v. late).

ryft (i, e) n. _covering, veil, curtain, cloak_, CP.

ryge (i) m. '_rye_,' _Cp_.

rygen (i) _made of rye_, _Lcd_. ['_ryen_']

rýhe f. _rug, blanket_, #Gl#.

ryht == riht

rým- = rîm-

±rýman (ê) _to clear, open up_, _A, B, Lk, Met, W_: _widen, extend,
prolong, enlarge_, _Æ, CP_: _make room, retire, retreat, yield_, _Æ_.
['_rime_'; rûm]

rýmet n. _room, space, extent_, Æ: _comfort, benefit_.

rýmetlêast f. _want of room_, ÆH 1·34^22.

rýmð f. _amplitude_, CM 17.

rýn, rýnan _to roar, rage_.

ryne (e) m. _running, onward course_, _A, Æ, Bo, VHy_; AO: _flux, flow
(water, blood)_, _Lk_; Æ: _period of time, cycle, course of life_:
_expanse, extent_: _orbit_. ['_rune_']

±rýne n. _mystery, dark saying_.

rynegiest m. _running spirit_ (= _lightning_)? _rain-foe_? (Tupper),
#Rd# 4^58.

-rýnegu v. hel-r.

rynel (e) m. _runnel, stream_, _Bl, GD, VPs_: _runner, messenger_, Æ.
['_rindle_']

±rýnelic _mystical_. adv. -lîce.

rynelîce? '_cursim_,' OEG 7^90.

rýnemann § m. _one skilled in mysteries_.

rynestrong _strong in running_, #Rd# 20^7.

ryneswift ¶ _swift in running_.

ryneðrâg f. _space of time_, #Gu# 184.

rynew¯æn ¶ m. _swift vehicle, chariot_.

ryng- = reng-

rýnig _good in counsel_? #Cra# 51. [rûn]

ryniga? m. _liquid that runs off_? #Lcd#.

rynning f. _rennet_, WW 128^43.

rýnstæf (MF 172) = rûnstæf

rýp = rîp

±rýpan I. _to spoil, plunder, rob_, _Chr, MtL, LL, W_. ['_ripe_'] II.
pl. _sheaves_, #CSPs#. III. = r¯æpan. IV. = rîpan

rýpere m. _robber, plunderer_.

rýping m. _plunder, spoliation_, OEG 3149. ['_riping_']

ryplen? _made of broom_. [A 31·536]

ryps = reps

-rýric v. s¯æ-r.

rysc- = risc-

rysel, rysl (Æ), rys(e)le m. _lard, fat_.

+rysen-, +rysn- = +risn-

rýsig (OEG 8^337) = hrîsig

ryt _rubbish for burning, underwood_, LL 36[27].

rýð I. = rîð. II. pres. 3 sg. of rýn.

rýðer = hrîðer

ryðða m. _a species of dog, mastiff_, Æ. [_Ger._ rüde]




=S=


sâ m. _tub, bucket_, _Gl_. [_ON._ sâr; v. '_say_']

saban m? _sheet_, WW 502^33.

sac = (1) sacu; (2) sæc

saca nap. of sacu.

±saca m. _opponent, foe_, Æ.

sacan^6 _to struggle, dispute, disagree, wrangle, fight_: _accuse,
blame, bring a criminal or civil action against any one, lay claim
to_, LL.

sacc (æ) m. _'sack,' bag_, _Æ_. [_L._ saccus]

sâcerd mf. _priest, priestess_, Æ, CP. [_L._ sacerdos]

sâcerdbana m. _priest-slayer_, W.

sâcerdgerîsne _befitting a priest_, BH 206^12.

sâcerdhâd m. _priesthood_, CP.

sâcerdland n. _land allotted to priests_, Æ.

sâcerdlic _sacerdotal, priestly_, BH.

sâcerhâd = sâcerdhâd

sacful _quarrelsome, contentious_, _Æ_. ['_sakful_']

sacian _to wrangle, strive_, Æ.

saclêas _innocent_, _LL_: _unmolested, safe_, _KC, MtL_. ['_sackless_']

sacu f. (oblique cases often have sæc-) (±) _conflict, strife, war,
battle, feud, sedition, dispute_, _Æ, B_; AO: _affliction, persecution,
trial_: _sin, fault_, _B, Ph_: _prosecution, lawsuit, action_. s. and
sôcn _jurisdiction, right of holding a court for criminal and civil
matters_, _LL_ (v. 2·455). ['_sake_']

sad- v. sæd.

sâda m. _snare, cord, halter_. [cp. _Ger._ saite]

sadel = sadol

±sadelian _to 'saddle,'_ _Æ, KC_ ('_saddled_').

sadian _to be sated, get wearied_, _Bo_: (+) _satiate, fill_, _Ps_.
['_sade_'; sæd]

sadol (e^2, u^2) m. _saddle_.

sadolbeorht _with ornamented saddle_, B 2175.

sadolboga m. '_saddle-bow_,' _WW_.

sadolfelg f. _pommel of a saddle_, #Gl#.

Saducêisc _Sadducean_; as sb. m. _Sadducee_.

sadul = sadol

s¯æ mf. often indecl. but also gs. s¯æs, s¯æwe, sêo; nap. s¯æs, gp.
s¯æwa, dp. s¯æwum, s¯æ(u)m _sheet of water_, _'sea,' lake, pool_,
_Æ, B, Bo, G, Lcd, VPs_.

s¯æ¯æl m. _sea-eel_, WW 447^36.

s¯æælfen = s¯æelfen

s¯æbât ¶ f. _'sea-boat,' vessel, ship_, _B_.

s¯æbeorg m. _cliff by the sea_: _mountain of waves_? #An# 308.

s¯æburg f. _seaport town_, MtL 4^13.

sæc I. _offensive, odious_: _guilty_. II. (#KGl# 61^22) = sacc

sæc- = sec- (and v. sacu)

s¯æc- = sêc-

sæcc I. f. _strife, contest_. [sacan] II. m. _sackcloth_, _Æ_.
['_sack_'; = sacc]

sæcce pres. 1 sg. of sâcan.  [[headword spelled "sacan"]]

sæccing m. _sacking, pallet_, Mk 6^55.

sæcdôm = sceacdôm

s¯æceaster f. _seaport town_, MtR 4^13.

s¯æceosol m. _sea-sand, shingle_, Æ.

sæcerd == sacerd  [[headword spelled "sâcerd"]]

sæcgen = sægen

s¯æcir m. _sea-ebbing_, #Ex# 291.

s¯æclian (_Chr_) = sîclian

s¯æclif n. _cliff by the sea_, _Bo_. ['_seacliff_']

s¯æcocc m. _cockle_, WW 94^14.

s¯æcol n. _jet_, WW 416^2. ['_seacoal_']

s¯æcyning m. _sea-king_, B 2382.

sæcysul = s¯æceosol

sæd (occl. sad- in obl. cases) w. g. _sated with, weary of, satiated,
filled, fill_, _Ps, Rd_. ['_sad_']

s¯æd n., nap. s¯æd, s¯ædu '_seed_,' _Mk_, #VPs# (ê), Æ, CP: _fruit,
offspring, posterity_, _MkL, VPs_: _sowing_, _Met_; Æ: _growth_.

s¯ædberende _seed-bearing_, Æ.

s¯ædcynn n. _kind of seed_.

s¯æde pret. 3 sg. of secgan.

s¯ædêor m. _sea-monster_.

s¯ædere m. _sower_, _Æ, MkL_. ['_seeder_']

s¯ædian _to provide seed_, LL 450[10].

s¯ædlêap m. _sower's basket_, _A_. ['_seedlip_']

s¯ædlic _belonging to seed, seminal_, DR 146^5.

s¯ædnað m. _sowing_, WW 147^4.

sædnes f. _satiety_, GPH 391.

s¯ædraca m. _sea-dragon_.

s¯ædsworn _seed_ (fig. and collectively), REHy 8(9)^55.

s¯ædtîma m. _seed-time_, #Hex# 12^28.

s¯æearm m. _arm of the sea_, AO 22^4.

s¯æelfen (æ^2) f. _sea-elf, Naiad_, WW.

s¯æfæreld n. _passage of the (Red) sea_, AO 38^33.

s¯æfæsten f. _watery stronghold, ocean_, #Ex# 127.

s¯æ-faroð, -fearoð ¶ m. _sea-coast_.

Sæfern f. _Severn_. [_L._ Sabrina]

s¯æfisc m. '_sea-fish_,' _Cr_.

s¯æflôd mn. _tide, inundation, flood, flow of the sea, flood-tide_, _AO_:
(¶)_sea_. ['_seaflood_']

s¯æflota m. _(sea-floater), ship_, #An# 381.

s¯æfôr f. _sea-voyage_, #Seaf# 42.

±s¯ægan _to cause to sink, settle_: _cause to fall, fell, destroy_.
[sîgan]

sægd- = sæged-

sægde pret. 3 sg. of secgan.

sægdig (N) = sægde ic  [[form of "secgan"]]

s¯ægêap _spacious (ship)_, B 1896.

±s¯ægednes f. _sacrifice_, MkLR 12^33; #APs# 65^13: _mystery_, MtL
13^11 (gd-).

s¯ægem¯ære n. _sea-coast_, G.

±sægen (e) f. _speech, statement_, Æ, AO: _premonition, prophecy_, AO:
_report, story, legend_. sêo hâlge +s. _Holy Writ_.

s¯ægenga m. ¶ _ship_: _sailor_.

s¯ægeset m. _coast region_, #Gl#.

sægl = sigel

sægnian = segnian

s¯ægon pret. pl. of sêon.

s¯ægrund m. _sea-bottom, abyss_, Æ, CP.

sæh = seah

s¯æhealf f. _side next the sea_, #Chr# 1072#e#.

s¯æhengest m. _sea-horse, ship_, #An# 488: _hippopotamus_, WW.

s¯æhete m. _boiling, surging of the sea_, BH 384^24.

s¯æholm m. _ocean_, #An# 529.

sæht = seht

sæhtlian = sahtlian  [[under "sehtlian"]]

s¯æhund m. _sea-dog, sea-monster_, OEG 26^61.

sæl n. nap. salu _room, hall, castle_, _B, Rd_. ['_sale_'; _Ger._ saal]

s¯æl (ê) I. mf. (occl. dp. sâlum) _time, season, opportunity, occasion,
condition, position_, _Lcd_; Æ, AO: _prosperity, happiness, joy_, _B_.
on s¯ælum _happy_; '_gaudete_,' GD 202^6. tô s¯æles _in due time_, NR 39.
II. = sêl II.

s¯ælâc ¶ n. _sea-gift, sea-spoil_, B.

s¯ælâd ¶ f. _sea-way, sea-voyage_.

s¯ælâf ¶ f. _sea-leavings, jetsam_.

±s¯ælan I. (ê) _to take place, happen_. [s¯æl I.] II. ¶ _to tie, bind,
fetter, fasten_: _curb, restrain, confine_. [sâl; _Ger._ seil]

s¯æland n. _coast, maritime district_, Ct.

sæld = seld

sælen I. _made of willow_, WW 518^6. [sealh] II. = selen

s¯æleoda = s¯ælida

s¯ælêoð n. _song at sea, rowers' song_, WW 379^9.

-sæleða v. sealt-s.

s¯ælic _of the sea, marine_, Æ.

s¯ælida m. _seafarer, sailor, mariner_: _pirate_. [lîðan]

±s¯ælig (+ exc. at LL 300#a#) _happy, prosperous_, _AO, Bo, Gen_.
['_i-seli_']

+s¯ælige _happily_, WW 407^23.

+s¯æliglic _happy, blessed, fortunate_. adv. -lîce, _Bo_. ['_sellily_']

+s¯ælignes f. _happiness_.

s¯æ-lîðend, -lîðende ¶ m. _sailor_.

+s¯ællic = +s¯æliglic

sælmerige f. _brine_, Æ. [_L._ *salmoria; _Gk._ +halmuris+]

+sæltan (NG) = sealtan

sæltna m. _name of a bird, bunting_? _robin_? WW 44^17.

sælð f. _dwelling, house_, #Gen# 785.

±s¯ælð (ý) f. (usu. in pl.) _happiness, prosperity, blessing_, _Bo_; Æ,
CP. ['_i-selth_']

s¯ælwang (o^2) ¶ m. _fertile plain_.

s¯æm v. s¯æ.

s¯æma = sêma

+s¯æman = +sýman, sîeman

s¯æmann m. _'seaman,' pirate, viking_, _B_.

s¯æmearh ¶ m. _sea-horse, ship_.

s¯æmend = sêmend

s¯æmest superl. (of *s¯æme?) _worst_.

s¯æmestre = sêamestre

s¯æmêðe _weary from a sea-voyage_, B 325.

s¯æminte f. _sea-mint_, WW.

sæmninga = samnunga

s¯æmra comp. (of *s¯æme?) _worse, inferior, weaker_.

sæmtinges = samtinges

s¯æn _maritime_, OEG 6^23.

s¯ænaca m. _sea-vessel, ship_, #Hu# 26.

s¯ænæs m. _cape, promontory, maze_.

sæncgan = sengan

sændan = sendan

s¯æne (often w. g.) _slack, lazy, careless, negligent, dull, cowardly_.

s¯ænet n. _net for sea-fishing_, WW 336^20.

sængan = sengan

s¯ænian = sênian

sæp (e) n. _'sap,' juice_, _Cr, WW_.

s¯æp (ÆL 3^162) = sêap

sæpig _'sappy,' juicy, succulent_, OEG 16^1.

sæppe f. _spruce fir_, WW 269^14. [_L._ *sappinum; _Fr._ sapin]

sæpspôn f. _a shaving with sap in it_, #Lcd# 106b.

s¯ære = sâre

s¯ærima m. _sea-border, sea-shore, coast_, _Chr_. ['_searim_']

s¯ærinc ¶ m. _seaman, pirate, viking_.

s¯ærôf _hardy at sea_, #Cra# 56.

særwian = searwian

s¯ærýric m. _sea-reed_? (GK); _an ait_? (BT), #Whale# 10.

sæs = sess

s¯æs v. s¯æ.

s¯æsceaða m. _pirate_, WW 469^6.

s¯æscell f. '_sea-shell_,' _MH_ 18^23.

s¯æsîð m. _sea-voyage_, B 1149.

s¯æ-snægl, -sn¯æl m. '_sea-snail_,' _WW_.

s¯æsteorra m. _guiding star (for sailors)_, _HL_. ['_seastar_']

sæster = sester

s¯æstrand m. _'sea-strand,' foreshore_, _Æ_.

s¯æstrêam, as mpl. _waters of the sea_, _An_. ['_seastream_']

s¯æswalwe (h¯æ-) f. _sand-martin_, WW 7^28.

sæt pret. 3 sg. of sittan.

s¯æt f. _lurking-place_: _snare, gin_? LL 445[2]. [sittan]

+sæt n. _act of sitting_, MkL p5^14.

s¯æta m? _holding of land_, EC 447^18.

-s¯æta (ê) v. burg-s.

s¯ætan = s¯ætian

-s¯æte v. an(d)-s.

sæterdæg = sætern(es)dæg

s¯æt-ere, -nere (ê) m. _waylayer, robber_: _spy_: _seditious one, seducer
(the Devil)_, CP.

sætern-dæg, sæter(n)es- m. '_Saturday_,' _BH, Bl, Lk_. [_L._ Saturni
dies]

sæterniht f. _Friday night_, Æ.

s¯ætian (ê) (w. g.) _to lie in wait for, plot against_, CP. [sittan]

sætil, sætl == setl

s¯ætn- = s¯æt-

+sætnes = +setnes

s¯æton pret. pl. of sittan.

s¯ætung (ê) f. _ambush, trap, plot, snare_, CP: _sedition_.

s¯æð (ÆL 36^295) = sêað

s¯æðêof v. hêahs¯æðêof.

sæðerie f. _savory (plant)_. [_L._ satureia]

s¯æðrenewudu = sûðernewudu

s¯æum v. s¯æ.

s¯æûpwearp _jetsam_, TC 421^32.

s¯æw¯æg m. _sea-wave_, #Da# 384.

s¯æwæter n. '_sea-water_,' _Lcd_ 10b.

s¯æwan = sâwan

s¯æwâr n. _sea-weed_, _WW_ 135^21. ['_seaware_']

s¯æwaroð n. _sea-shore, beach_.

s¯æwe v. s¯æ.

s¯æweall ¶ m. _'sea-wall,' seashore, beach, cliff_, _B_: _wall of water
(in the Red Sea)_.

s¯æweard m. _coast warden_, LL.

s¯æweg m. _path through the sea_, _Ps_ 8^8. ['_seaway_']

s¯æwêrig ¶ _weary from a sea-voyage_, _An_. ['_seaweary_']

s¯æwet n. _sowing_. [sâwan]

s¯æwîcing m. _sea-viking_, #Ex# 333.

s¯æwiht f. _marine animal_, BH 26^6.

s¯æwong m. _sea-shore, beach_, B 1964.

s¯æwð pres. 3 sg. of sâwan.

s¯æwudu m. _vessel, ship_, B 226.

s¯æwum v. s¯æ.

s¯æwylm m. _sea-surf, billow_, B 393.

sæx (#Gl#) = seax

s¯æýð f. _sea-wave_.

safene, safine f. _savine (a kind of juniper)_. [_L._ sabina]

saftriende ptc. _rheumatic_, WW 161^34.

sâg pret. 3 sg. of sîgan.

saga I. imperat. of secgan. II. m., +saga n. = sagu II.

+saga n. _narrative_, LkL 1^1.

sagast pres. 2 sg., sagað pres. 3 sg., sagode pret. 3 sg. of secgan.

sâg-ol, -el m. (sâgl- in obl. cases) _club, cudgel, stick, staff, pole_,
_AO, GD, Mt_; Æ, CP. ['_sowel_']

-sagol v. lêas-, sôð-, wær-s.

sagu (±) I. f. _'saw,' saying, report, story, tradition, tale_, _Lk,
WW_; Æ: _presage, prophecy_: _witness, testimony_. [secgan] II. f.
_'saw' (tool)_, _A, WW_.

sâh I. pret. 3 sg. of sîgan. II. pret. 3 sg. of sêon II.

sahl- = sealh-

sâhl = sâgol

saht == seht

sâl mf. _bond, rope, cord, rein, collar_, _B, Gen_. ['_sole_'; _Ger._
seil]

sala m. _act of selling, 'sale,'_ _WW_.

salb = sealf

salch = sealh

salde = sealde pret. 3 sg. of sellan.

salf (Cp) = sealf

salfie, salfige f. _sage_, #Lcd#. [_L._ salvia]

salh (_Gl_), salig = sealh

salletan _to sing psalms, play on, or sing to, the harp_. [_L._
psallere]

salm- = sealm-

sâlnes f. _silence_, A 8·319^29. [cp. _Goth._ silan]

salo == salu

salor = solor

salowigpâd = saluwigpâd

salt == sealt

saltere (ea) m. _'psalter,' collection of psalms, service book
containing the psalms_, _BH, Ct_; Æ: _psaltery_, _Lcd_ (ps-). [_L._
psalterium]

salthaga m. _robin redbreast_? WW 286^11.

salu I. (ea) _dark, dusky_, _Rd_. ['_sallow_'] II. nap. of sæl.

salubrûn (ea^1, o^2) _dark brown_, #Fin# 37.

sâlum v. s¯æl.

saluneb _dark-complexioned_, #Rd# 50^5.

salupâd _dark-coated_, #Rd# 58^3.

saluwigpâd = salwigpâd

salwed ptc. _darkened, painted black (with pitch)_, #Gen# 1481.

salwigfeðera § _having dark plumage_.

salwigpâd ¶ _having dark plumage_.

sâlwong = s¯ælwang

sam conj. _whether, or_. sam...sam _whether...or_, AO. sam ge...sam ge;
sam ðe...sam ðe _whether...or_.

sam- (= _together_) denotes union, combination, or agreement. [_ON._
sam-]

sâm- (= _half-_) denotes a partial or imperfect condition. [_L._ semi-]

sama = same v. swâ.

samad- = samod-

sâmbærned _half-burnt_, OEG.

sâmboren _born out of due time_, WW 356^2.

sâmbryce m. _partial breach (of rules, laws, etc.)_, LL 468[9].

sâm-cwic, -cucu (o^1) _half-dead_, Æ, AO.

same only in swâ s. (swâ) _in like manner, also, as_.

samed == samod

samen adv. _together_, JnR (o^1).

sâmgrêne _half-green, immature_, WW 405^4.

sâmgung _young_, CM 123. [geong]

sâmhâl _unwell, weakly_, W 273^10.

samheort _unanimous_, #PPs# 149^1.

±samhîwan pl. _members of the same household_, CP.

samhwyle pron. _some_.

sâml¯æred _half-taught, badly instructed_, Æ.

samlîce _together, at the same time_.

samlinga = samnunga

sâmlocen _half-closed_, NC 318.

samm¯æle _agreed, accordant, united_.

sâmmelt _half-digested_, #Lcd# 69b.

±samnian _to assemble, meet, collect, unite, join, gather together_,
(tr.) _Da, Lcd_; (intr.) _Ps_: _glean_. ['_sam_']

samninga = samnunga

±samnung (o) f. (but occl. gs. samnunges) _assembly, council_, _MkL_; Æ,
CP. ['samening']

samnunga (æ, e, o) adv. _forthwith, immediately, suddenly_. [= semninga]

samnungewide (o^1) _collect_, DR 2^1.

samod (o^1) I. adv. _simultaneously, at the same time, together_, Æ, AO:
_entirely_, Æ: _also, as well, too_. II. prep. (w. d.) _together with,
at_ (of time), Æ. [_Ger._ sammt]

samodberan^4 _to bear together_.

samodcumend _flocking together_, CM 282.

samodeard (o^1, u^2) § m. _common home_.

samodfæst _joined together_, #Cr# 1581.

samodgang? m. _communication between rooms_, GD 170^23. (v. NC 318.)

samodgeflit (o) n. _strife_, WW 382^38.

samodgesîð m. _comrade_, GPH 400.

samodherian (o^1) _to praise together_, #RPs# 116^1.

samodhering f. _praising_, ES 40·302.

+samodl¯æcan _to bring together_, #RPs# 112^8.

samodlîce adv. _together_, #Chr# 1123.

samodrynelas mpl. '_concurrentes_,' A 8·302.

samodspr¯æc f. _colloquy, conversation_, CM 511.

samodswêgende _consonantal_, #ÆGr# 5^17.

samodtang _continuous, successive_, v. NC 318.

samodðyrlic (o) adj. _concordant_, WW 378^40.

samodwellung (o^1) f. _welding together_, WW 380^44. [weallan]

samodwist f. _a being one with_, GD 224^4.

samodwunung f. _common residence, living together_, LL (422^29).

samodwyrcende ptc. _co-operating_, WW 384^12.

sâmra = s¯æmra

samrâd _harmonious, united_, #Met# 11^96.

sâmsoden _half-cooked_, LL (166^2n).

sâmstorfen _half-dead_, GPH 401.

sâmsw¯æled _half burnt_, OEG 4388.

samswêge (u^1) adj. _sounding together, in unison_.

samtinges (æ^1, e^1, e^2) adv. _all at once, immediately, forthwith_, Æ.

samðe conj. in phrase samðe...samðe... _as well...as..._
('_tam_'...'_quam_'...), CM 140, etc. [sam]

sâmweaxen _half-dead_, NC 319.

samwinnende ptc. _contending together_, WW 211^7.

sâmwîs _stupid, dull, foolish_, CP. adv. -lîce.

samwist f. _living together, cohabitation_.

sâmworht _unfinished_, #Chr#.

samwr¯ædnes f. _union, combination_. #Bo# 114^4.

sâmwyrcan _to half do a thing, do it imperfectly_, LL 350[61,1].

sanc I. pret. 3 sg. of sincan. II. = sang

sanct m. _holy person, saint_, Æ. [_L._ sanctus]

sand (o) I. f. _action of sending, embassy, mission, deputation_, Æ:
_message_: (also m.) _messenger, ambassador_: _sending, service, course
of food, repast, mess, victuals_, _Ep_; Æ. [_'sand_'; sendan] II. n.
'_sand,' gravel_, _Æ, VPs_; AO; Mdf: _sandy shore, sea-shore, beach_.

sandbeorg m. _sand-hill, sand-bank_.

sandceosol m. _sand, gravel_, Æ.

sandcorn n. _grain of sand_, Æ.

sandgeweorp (u^3) n. _sand-bank, quicksand_.

sandgewyrpe n. _sand-heap_, KC 6·228^23.

sandgrot n. _grain of sand_, #Hell# 117.

sand-hlið n., nap. -hleoðu _sandy slope, hillock_, #An# 236.

sandhof § n. _sand-house, barrow, grave_.

sandhricg m. _sand-bank_, #ÆGr# 75^8.

sandhyll m. '_sand-hill_,' _Cp_ (o).

sandig '_sandy_,' _Lcd_.

sandiht (o) _sandy, dusty_, AO.

sandlond ¶ (o) n. _sandy shore_.

sandrid n. _quicksand_, WW 183^7.

sang I. m. _noise_, _'song,' singing_, _B, Bo, Cr, LkL_: _psalm, poem,
lay_, _Bl, CP, VPs_ (o). II. pret. 3 sg. of singan.

sangbôc f. _singing-book, service-book_, _KC, LL_. ['_songbook_']

sangcræft m. _art of singing, composing poetry, or playing an
instrument_.

sangdrêam m. _'cantilena,' song, music_, CM 638.

sangere (o) m. _singer, poet_, _BH, Bl_. ['_songer_']

sangestre f. _songstress_, _ÆGr_. ['_songster_']

sangpîpe f. _pipe_, GPH 389^26.

-sânian v. â-s. [s¯æne]

sann pret. 3 sg. of sinnan.

sâp f? _amber, unguent_, #Gl#.

sâpbox m. _box for resin_? _soap-box_? LL 455[17].

sâpe f. _'soap,' salve_, _Lcd, WW_; Æ.

sâr I. n. _bodily pain, sickness_, _BH, Bl, Cr, VPs_: _wound_, _'sore,'
raw place_, _Gu, Lcd_: _suffering, sorrow, affliction_, _Bo, Chr_. II.
adj. _sore, sad, grievous, painful, wounding_, _CP, Cr, Gen, Lcd,
LL, Rd_.

sârbenn ¶ f. _painful sore or wound_.

sârbôt f. _compensation for wounding_, LL 500[10,1].

sârclâð m. _bandage_, WW.

sârcren _sore, tender_, #Lcd# 65b.

sârcwide ¶ m. _taunt, reproach_: _lament_.

sâre (¯æ) adv. _sorely, heavily, grievously, bitterly_, _B, Cr, Gen, Ps_:
_painfully_, _B_. ['_sore_']

sârettan _to grieve, be vexed, lament, complain_, CP.

sârferhð _sorrowful_, #Gen# 2244.

sarga m. _trumpet, clarion_, #Gl#.

sârgian (±) _to cause pain, afflict, wound, grieve_: _be pained, suffer,
languish_, CP. [sârig]

sârgung f. _lamentation, grief_.

sârian _to become painful_, CP: _grieve, be sad, feel sorry for_, BH.

sârig _'sorry,' grieved, sorrowful, sad_, _Æ, Bo, Cr, Ps_.

sârigcierm (e^3) m. _wailing_, MFH 128^8.

sârigferhð ¶ _sad-hearted_.

sârigmôd _dejected, mournful_, _B_. ['_sorry-mood_']

sârignes f. _sadness, grief_, _Æ, Chr_. ['_sorriness_']

sârlic _grievous, sad, doleful, painful, lamentable, bitter_, _Æ, B, Bo,
Bl_. adv. -lîce _'sorely,' grievously, mournfully, bitterly, painfully_,
_Æ, Bl, Bo, Jul_; CP.

sârnes f. _affliction, distress, suffering, pain, grief_, _Æ_.
['_soreness_']

sârseofung f. _complaint_, WW 488^36.

sârslege ¶ m. _painful blow_.

sârspell n. _sad story, complaint_.

sârstæf § m. _cutting word, abuse, insult_.

sârung = sârgung

sarw- = searw-

sâr-wracu ¶ f., gds. -wræce _grievous persecution, sore tribulation_.

sârwylm m. _pain, illness_, #Gu# 1123.

saturege f. _savory (plant)_, _Lcd_ 147a. ['_satureie_']

sâul = sâwol

±sâwan^7 _to 'sow,' strew seed, implant_, _Æ, Bo, Lcd, G, VPs_:
_disseminate_, _Bo, CP_.

sâwel == sâwol

+sâweled _having a soul_, G.

sâwend, sâwere (_Mt_) m. '_sower_.'

sâwl (CP) == sâwol

sâwlian _to expire_, Æ.

sâwlung (e^2) f. _dying_, _Shr_. ['_souling_']

sâ-wol (-wel, -wul, -wl) f., gs, sâwle _'soul,' life_, _Æ, B, Bl, Bo,
VPs_; CP: _spirit_, _Bl, Chr_: _living being_, _Æ_.

sâwolberend m. _human being_, B 1004 (wl).

sâwolcund (e) _spiritual_, #Gu# 288.

sawoldrêor ¶ n. _life-blood_.

sâwolgedâl ¶ n. _death_.

sâwolgesceot = sâwolscot  [[under "sâwolsceat"]]

sâwolhord (e^2, wl) ¶ n. _life, body_.

sâwolhûs ¶ n. _(soul house), body_.

sâwollêas _soulless, lifeless_, Æ.

sâwol-sceat (e^2), -scot m. _payment to the church on the death of a
person_, LL.

sâwolðearf f. _soul's need_, TC 474 (wl).

sâwon pret. pl. of sêon.

sâwul == sâwol

sca-, scâ-, v. also scea-, scêa-.

scâbfot = scâffôt

scâd = +scêad I.

scâda m. _crown of head_, #PPs# 67^21. ['_shode_']

scâdesealf (êa) f. _salve or powder_ (_for the head_?), #Lcd#.

+scâdwyrt f. _oxeye_, #Lcd# 103a.

scæ- = scea-

sc¯æ- = scêa-

scæc, scec _'boja,' fetters_, #JGPh# 1·329. [_Du._ schake]

scæcen pp. of sceacan.

scæd = (1) scead; (2) sceabb

scæftamund = sceaftmund

scæfð = sceafoða

scægð = scegð

scæm- = scam-

sc¯ænan I. (±) (ê, êa) _to break, wrench open_, _Æ_. ['_shene_'] II. (+)
_to render brilliant_? #Sol# 222 (GK).

scænc = scenc

scændan = sciendan

+sc¯æningnes f. _collision_, WW 384^10.

sc¯æp == scêap

scæptlô (Cp) = sceaftlô

scær = scear I. and II.

sc¯æron pret. pl. of scieran.

sc¯æð I. (_Gen_) = scêað. II. = scegð

scæð- = sceð-, sceað-

scafa m. _plane_, _Ep, LL_. ['_shave_']

±scafan^6 (a, æ, ea) _to 'shave,' scrape, polish_, _Cp, BH_.

scâffôt _splay-footed_, #Gl#.

scalde = sceolde pret. 3 sg. of sculan.

scaldhûl _papyrus-plant_, Cp 1491 (v. ES 43·320).

scaldðýfel = scealdðýfel

scalu = scealu

scamel = scamol

scamfæst _'shamefast,' modest_, _CP_.

scamful (eo) _modest_, _DR_. ['_shameful_']

scamian (ea, eo, o) (w. g.) _to be ashamed, blush_, _B, CP_: (impers.,
w. a. of pers. and g. of thing) _cause shame_, _Æ_ (ea), _CP_.
['_shame_']

scamisc _causing shame_, WW 532^31.

scamlêas _'shameless,' impudent, immodest_, _CP_.

scamlêaslic _shameless_, CP. adv. -lîce '_shamelessly_,' _CP_.

scamlêast (ea^1) f. _impudence, shamelessness, immodesty_.

scamlic (æ, ea) _shameful, disgraceful_, _OEG_; AO: _modest_.
['_shamely_'] adv. -lîce, CP.

scamlim n. _private member_, GPH 390.

scamol (æ^1, e^1, ea^1, eo^1, o^1; e^2, o^2) m. _stool, footstool,
bench, table (of money-changers)_, _Bl_ (eo), _VPs_ (o). ['_shamble_']

scamu (ea, eo, o) f. _'shame,' confusion_, _Cp_ (o), _Lk_ (eo):
_disgrace, dishonour_, _Cr_ (o): _insult_, MkR (o): _shameful
circumstance_, WW: _modesty_, CP: _private parts_, _Gen, WW_. s. dôn _to
inflict injury_.

scamul = scamol

scamung (ea) f. _disgrace_, #LPs# 68^20.

scân pret. 3 sg. of scînan.

scanca m. _'shank,' shin, leg_, _Ph, WW_: _ham_? _LL_ (sconc).

scancbend (scang-) m. _leg-band, garter_, WW 152^39.

scancforad _broken-legged_, CP.

scancgebeorg f. _leg-greave_, WW 535^9.

scancgegirela m. _leg-clothing, leg-band, anklet, garter_, WW 467^29.

scanclîra m. _calf of the leg_, WW 266^4.

scand I. (ea, eo, o) f. _ignominy, shame, confusion, disgrace_, _Chr,
Cr_: _scandal, disgraceful thing_, _CP_. II. m. _wretch, impostor,
recreant, buffoon_, _Æ_. III. f. _bad woman_. ['_shond_']

scandful _shameful, disgraceful_, _MH_. ['_shondfull_']

scandhûs m. _house of ill fame_, MH 26^24.

scandlic (ea, o) _shameful, disgraceful, vile, unchaste_, _Bo_; Æ, AO
(o). ['_shondly_'] adv. -lîce _shamefully, obscenely_: _insultingly_.

scandlicnes f. _shame, disgrace_, CP (o): _disgraceful act_.

scandlufiende _loving shamefully_, ZDA 31·25.

+scandnes (e, y) f. _shame, confusion_, _Æ, Ps_. ['_shendness_']

scandword (ea) n. _abusive, blasphemous or obscene language_, W 255^15.

scang- = scanc-

+scâp- = +scêap-

+scapen pp. of scieppan.

scar- = scear-

scað- = sceað-

scêab (_Cp_) = scêaf

sceaba = scafa

sceabb m. '_scab_,' _CP_. ['_shab_']

sceabbede _purulent, having sores or scabs_, _OEG_. ['_shabbed_']

sceacan^6 (tr. and intr.) _to 'shake,' move quickly to and fro_, _MtL_:
_go, glide, hasten, flee, depart_, _B_; Æ: _pass from, proceed_, CP.

sceacdôm (æ) m. _flight_, Æ.

sceacel (e) m. '_shackle_,' _WW_: _plectrum_.

scêacere m. _robber_, NG. [_Ger._ schächer]

sceacga m. _rough hair, wool, etc._, _WW_. ['_shag_']

sceacgede _hairy, shaggy_, WW.

sceaclîne (WW 182^26) = sceatlîne

sceacnes f. '_excussio_,' #EPs# 140^4.

sceacul = sceacel

scead (a, æ, e) n. _shadow, shade_: _shelter, protection_: _stye_, Cp
1954 (ES 43·326).

+scêad (â) n. _separation, distinction_, _LkL_: _discretion,
understanding, argument_, _Æ_; CP: _reason_, ÆP 142^11: _reckoning,
account_, _Mt_: _accuracy_. ['_shed_']

±scêadan^7 (â, ê) (tr. and intr.) _to divide, separate, part_, _Soul_;
#Lcd# (â): _discriminate, decide, determine, appoint_: _differ_:
_scatter, 'shed,'_ _Lcd_.

sceadd m. _'shad' (fish)_, _KC_ 6·147.

scêadelîce = scêadlîce

+scêaden _rational_, Æ.

scêadenm¯æl n. _damascened sword_? B 1939?

scêadesealf = scâdesealf

sceadew- = sceadw-

sceadiht _shady_, CVHy 5^3.

sceadlic _shady_, OEG 2885.

+scêadlic _reasonable, discreet, wise, accurate_, CP. adv. -lîce.

+scêadnes? '_auctoritas_,' NC.

sceadu (a) f., gs. scead(u)we, sceade _'shade,' shadow, darkness_, _Ex,
Ps, Sol_; CP: _shady place, arbour_, _Lcd_: _shelter_.

sceadugeard m. _shady place_, Cp 79#t#.

sceadugenga m. _wanderer in darkness_, B 703.

sceaduhelm (a^1) m. _darkness_, B 650.

sceadwian (a^1) _to protect, shield_, _Ps_ 90^4. ['_shadow_']

sceadwig _shady_, RHy 5^3.

±scêad-wîs (a), -wîslic _sagacious, intelligent, rational, wise_, Æ.
adv. -lîce.

scêadwîsnes f. _sagacity, reason_.

sceadwung f. _overshadowing_, Æ.

scêaf I. m. _'sheaf,' bundle_, _Æ, Lcd_; CP. II. pret. 3 sg. of scûfan.

sceafan = scafan

scêafm¯ælum adv. _into bundles_, Mt 13^30.

sceafoða m. _chip, shaving, slip, scraping_.

sceaft (æ, e) m. _staff, pole, 'shaft,'_ _Met, WW_: _spear-shaft,
spear_, _Æ_; CP.

±sceaft fn., nap. -tu, -ta, -te _created being, creature_, Æ, CP:
_creation, construction, existence_, Æ, CP: (+) _dispensation, destiny,
fate_, CP: (+) _condition, nature_. [scieppan]

sceaft-lô, pl. -lôn _spear-strap_, Cp (sce(a)pt-).

sceaftmund (æ) f. _span_, _LL_. ['_shaftment_']

sceaftrihte adv. _in a straight line_, CC 54.

sceafð = sceafoða

sceaga (a) m. _copse_, _Ct_; Mdf. ['_shaw_']

sceagod = sceacgede

sceal pres. 1 and 3 sg. of sculan.

scealc m. _servant, retainer, soldier, subject, member of a crew_, _Ps_:
_man, youth_, _B_. ['_shalk_']

sceald _shallow_, PST 1895-8, 532.

scealde = sceolde pret. 2 sg. of sculan.

scealdðýfel m. _'alga,' seaweed, marsh plant, shrub_, GD 100; 212 (v. ES
38·355; 43·318).

scealfor f., scealfra (Æ) m. _plungeon, diver (bird)_. [cp. _OHG._
scarbo]

scealga (y) m. _a fish, roach_? _rudd_? _WW_. ['_shallow_']

-scealian v. â-s.

sceall = sceal pres. 1 and 3 sg. of sculan.

sceallan pl. '_testiculi_,' #Lcd#.

scealtu = scealt ðu (pres. 2 sg. of sculan, and pron. 2 pers.).

scealu (a) f. _shell, husk_, _Ep_ (a): _scale (of a balance)_, Æ:
_dish_, _KC_. ['_shale_']

scêam m. _pale grey or white horse_? #Rd# 23^4. [_Ger._ schimmel]

sceam- = scam-

scêan pret. 3 sg. of scînan.

scêanan = sc¯ænan

sceanc- = scanc-

sceand == scand

scêanfeld = scînfeld

scêap (¯æ, ê, î) n. '_sheep_,' _CP, WW_.

+sceap (a) n., nap. -pu _'shape,' form, created being, creature_, _El,
Gen, WW_: _creation_: _dispensation, fate_: _condition_: (±)
'_genitalia_,' _A_.

-sceap v. for-s.

scêapætere (¯æ^1, î^1; e^2) m. _sheep's carcase_, LL 449[8].

sceapen pp. of scieppan.

scêapen adj. _of a sheep_, #Lcd#.

+sceapennes f. _creation, formation_, Æ.

scêaphâm m. _sheepfold_, EC 373.

scêapheord f. _flock of sheep_, Æ.

scêapheorden n. _shed_, WW 185^15.

+sceaphwîl (æ) f. _fated hour_, B 26.

scêaphyrde (_W_; Æ) (i) m. '_shepherd_.'

scêaplic _of a sheep_, OEG 11^187.

+sceaplîce _ably, fitly_, BH 324^4 (ca).

scêapscearu (ê) f. _sheep-shearing_, Æ.

-sceapung v. for-s.

scêapwæsce f. _place for washing sheep_, Ct.

scêapwîc n. _sheepfold_, KC 3·405^5.

scear I. (æ, e) mn. _ploughshare_, _Cp_ (æ), _Sc_ (e). ['_share_'] II.
pret. 3 sg. of scieran.

scêara = scêarra

scearbêam m. _wood to which the ploughshare is fixed_, WW 196^28.

sceard I. n. _incision, cleft, gap_, _Ct_: _potsherd_, _GPH_.
['_shard_'] II. adj. _cut, mutilated, gashed, notched, hacked_: (w. g.)
_bereft of, deprived of_.

±scearfian _to cut off, scrape, shred_.

scearflian _to scrape_, #Lcd# 1·184^18.

scearfung f. _scraping, scarifying_, #Lcd#.

scearn (æ, e) n. _dung, muck_, _Lcd, VPs_. ['_sharn_']

scearnbudda m. _dung-beetle_, #ÆGr# 308^1n.

scearn-wibba (æ, e) -wifel (-fifel, WW) m. _dung-beetle_.

scêaron = sc¯æron pret. pl. of scieran.

scearp (a, æ) _'sharp,' pointed, prickly_, _Lcd, Soul, VPs_: _acute,
keen, active, shrewd_, _Bo, Lcd_: _severe, rough, harsh_, _AO, Lcd_:
_biting, bitter, acid_, _Lcd_: _brave_. [scieran]

scearpe I. adv. _'sharply,' keenly_, _Hex, Ps_; Æ. II. f.
_scarification_, #Lcd#.

scearpecged '_sharp-edged_,' _Æ_.

scearpian _to score, scarify_, #Lcd#.

scearplic _sharp, severe, effectual_. adv. -lîce _'sharply,' acutely,
keenly_, _CP_: _painfully, severely_, _OET, W_: _effectually_, CM 192:
_attentively_, _A_: _quickly_, _WW_.

scearpnes f. _'sharpness,' acuteness, keen observation_, _Bo, Cp, CP_;
Æ: _tartness, pungency, acidity_, _Lcd, W_; Æ: _efficacy_.

scearpnumol _effective_, #Lcd#.

scearpsîene _keen-sighted_, #Bo#.

scearpsmêawung f. _argument_, G.

scearpðanc(ful)lîce adv. _efficaciously_.

scearpðancol _quick-witted, keen_, #Lcd# 3·440^28.

scearpung f. _scarifying_, #Lcd#.

scêarra fpl. _shears, scissors_, _A, CP, WW_. ['_shear_']

scearseax (e, i, ie, y) n. _razor_, CP.

scearu I. (a, æ, y) f. _shearing, shaving, tonsure_, Æ. II. (a) f.
_'share'-bone, groin_, _Lcd, WW_ (a).

scêat I. m. _corner angle, edge, point, promontory_, Mdf: _quarter,
district, region, surface (of the earth)_: _lap, bosom, fold_, CP:
_napkin, sheet, covering, cloak, garment_, CP: _inlet, creek_, BH 90^27.
[_Ger._ schoss] II. pret. 3 sg. of scêotan.

scêata m. _angle, corner_, AO: _bosom, lap, lower part of a sail_:
_napkin_. [_Ger._ schote]

scêatcod m. _wallet_, WW 107^5. [codd]

sceatlîne f. _sheet by which a sail is trimmed to the wind_, WW 288^24.

sceatt (æ, e) m. _property, treasure, coin, money, wealth_, _LL_:
_payment, price, tribute, bribe, reward_, Æ: _money of account,
denarius, twentieth part of a shilling_ (Kent), v. LL 2·634. ['_sceat_']

sceatwyrpan _to make the payment to the bridegroom on which the bride
passes into his power from that of the father_, WW 386^1 (v. ES 42·170).

scêað (¯æ, ê) f. '_sheath_,' _Æ, JnL_ (êæ): _spike, nail_, JnL 20^23?
[cp. hornscêað]

sceaða (a) m. _injurious person, criminal, thief, assassin_, _B, Mt_; Æ:
(¶) _warrior, antagonist_: _fiend, devil_: _injury_, _Gen_ 549.
['_scathe_']

sceaðan = sceððan

sceaðel f. _shuttle_? _weaver's slay_? LL 455, 15, 1 (v. ANS 115^165).

sceaðenes = sceðnes

sceaðful _hurtful_, _GD_ 209. ['_scatheful_']

sceaðian _to injure, spoil, steal_.

sceaðig (æ) _injurious_, #ÆGr# 63^15.

sceaðung f. _injury, damage_, TC 138^18.

scêawendspr¯æc f. _scurrility, buffoonery_, WW 533^4.

scêawendwîse f. _buffoon's song_, #Rd# 9^9.

scêawere m. _beholder, spectator, observer, spy_, _B_; Æ, CP: _mirror_.
['_shower_']

±scêawian _to look, gaze, see, behold, observe_, _B_; Æ, AO, CP:
_inspect, examine, scrutinize_, _Chr, Lk_; Æ, AO: _have respect to, look
favourably on_, Æ: _look out, look for, choose_, Æ: _decree, grant_.
['_show_']

scêawung (a) f. _seeing, surveying, inspection, scrutiny, examination,
contemplation_, AO, CP: _respect, regard_: _show, spectacle,
appearance_, _Bl, MkL_: _toll on exposure of goods_. ['_showing_']

sceb = sceabb

scêb = scêaf

scec = scæc

scecel = sceacel

sced = scead

scêd pret. 3 sg. of scêadan.

scef- = sceaf-, scyf-

scegð (æ, ei) mf. _vessel, ship_. [_ON._ skeið]

scegðmann (æ) m. _sailor, pirate, viking_, Æ.

scehð = scegð

sceið = scegð

scel = (1) sceal; (2) sciell

sceld = (1) scield; (2) scyld I.

sceld- = scild-, scyld-

scelêge (#Gl#) = sceolhêge

scelfan^3 (= ie) _to totter, shake_. [_ON._ skialfa]

scelfor = scealfor

scell I. = sceal. II. = sciell

scelle (= ie) _separation_? _cutting off_? Cp 777#c# (v. FM 100).

scemel = scamol

scênan = sc¯ænan

scenc (æ) m. (±) _drink, draught_, _Lcd, MtL_: _cup_, CM 959.
['_shench_']

±scencan _to pour out, give drink_, _B, LPs_ (æ), _Sc_; Æ, CP.
['_shench_'; _Ger._ schenken]

scencingcuppe f. _jug_, TC 536^7.

scendan I. (±, i, ie, y) _to put to shame, confound, discomfort_, _AO,
VPs_: _blame_, _CP_ (ie): _corrupt, injure_, _Cr, DR_: _disgrace,
insult_. ['_shend_'] II. = scyndan I.

scendle f. _reproach_, LkLR 11^8.

+scendnes = +scandnes

scendung f. _reproach, affliction_, N.

scêne = scîene

scênfeld = scînfeld

scennum dp. of sb. _pommel of sword-hilt_? _plate of metal on pommel_? B
1694.

+scento, +scendðo (#VPs#) f. _shame, confusion_.

scêo I. _cloud_? #Rd# 4^41. II. = scêoh, scôh

sceo- = sco-, scu-

scêo- = scô-, scû-

scêoc pret. 3 sg. of sceacan.

sceocc- = scucc-

scêod I. = scôd pret. 3 sg of sceððan. II. pp. of scôgan.

scêofan = scûfan

scêogan (CP) = scôgan

scêoh I. _'shy,' timid_, _Rim_ 43. II. = scôh

scêohmôd _timid_, #Jul# 672.

sceol (*sceolh) _squinting, awry_, WW. [_Ger._ scheel]

sceolan = sculan

sceoldan = scieldan

sceolh-êge, -ê(a)gede (y) _squinting_, Æ.

sceolu = scolu

sceom- = scam-

scêon (±) I. ¶ _to fall (to)_, _occur, happen_: _go quickly, fly_. II. =
scôgan

scêon- = scîen-

scêona gp. of scêoh.

sceonc- = scanc-

sceond = scand

sceop = scop

scêop pret. 3 sg. of scieppan.

sceoppa m. _booth_, _Lk_ 21^1. ['_shop_']

sceoppend = scieppend

sceopu nap. of scip.

scêor = scûr

sceoran = scieran

sceorf = scurf

sceorfan^3 _to scarify, gnaw_, AO: (+) _scrape, shred_.

sceorian = scorian

sceorp (o) n. _ornament, clothing_, AO: _equipment, fittings_ (_for a
ship_?), LL 444[1].

±sceorpan^3 _to scrape, gnaw_, #Lcd#.

sceort == scort

scêos gs., nap. of scêoh, scôh.

sceot == scot

±scêot _ready, quick_.

sceota m. _'shoat,' trout_, _WW_ 94.

±scêotan^2 _to 'shoot,' hurl missiles, cast_, _Bl, Ma, ZDA_; Æ: _strike,
hit, push, thrust_, _AO, Lcd, Ma_: _run, rush, dart, press forward_, _Æ,
Jn_: _contribute, pay_: _refer to, appeal to_, _Æ, TC_.

scêotend ¶ m. _bowman, warrior_.

sceoton = scuton pret. pl. of scêotan.

sceoða = sceaða

scêo-ðwang, -ðong m. _'shoe-thong,' boot-lace_, _Jn_.

scêowyrhta m. _shoemaker, leather-worker_, GD 322^1 (scôh-); WW 97^5.

scep = scyp I.

scep- = sciep-

+scep = +sceap

scêp (_VPs_) = scêap

scepen I. pp. of scieppan. II. = scypen. III. (N) = scieppend

sceppe f. _a dry measure_, NC 319. [_ON._ skeppa]

sceptlôh, sceptôg (#Gl#) = sceaftlô

scer = scear

scer- = scear-, scier-, scir-

scerero (OET) = scearra  [[headword spelled "scêarra"]]

scernicge (= ie) f. _actress, female jester_, _A_; MH, #Rd# (sciren-).

+scert _shortened_, OEG 130. [scyrtan]

sceruru = scearra  [[headword spelled "scêarra"]]

scêt = scêat pret. 3 sg. of scêotan.

scête = scýte

scetel (#KGl#) = scyttel

scett = sceatt

scêð = (1) scêað; (2) scegð

sceðd¯æd (æ) f. _injurious deed, crime_, WW.

sceð-nes, -enes f. _hurt, injury_.

±sceððan^6 and wv. (ea, y) _to scathe, injure, hurt, crush, oppress,
disturb_. [sceaða]

sceððend ¶ m. _adversary_.

+sceððendlic _hurtful_, DR 118^16.

sceððu f. _hurt, injury_, #Lcd# 1·342^17.

sceðwr¯æc _hurtful, wicked_, #Bl# 161^33.

sceu- = scu-

scêu- = scû-

scêwyrhta = scêowyrhta

scîa m. _shin, leg_, #Gl#.

sciccels, sciccel (y) m. _coat, mantle, cloak_.

sciccing m. _mantle, cloak, cape_, #Gl#.

scîd n. _thin slip of wood, shingle, billet_, _Gl, WW_. ['_shide_']

scîdhrêac m. _rick or heap of firewood_, EC 351.

scîdweall m. _wooden palings_, WW 146^28.

+scîe = +scý

-scîelan (ý) v. be-s.  [[under "bescýlan"]]

scield (e, i, y) m. _'shield,' protector_, _Bl, Ph_: (±) _protection,
defence_, _VPs_; AO, CP: _part of a bird's plumage_? #Ph# 308.

scield- v. also scild-.

±scieldan (i, eo, y) _to protect, 'shield,' ('i-shield') guard, defend,
defend oneself_, _Æ, B, Bl, VPs_; CP. +scieldod _furnished with
shields_, _Bl_.

sciele (CP) pres. sg. subj. of sculan.

sciell f. '_shell_,' _Cp, MH_; OEG: _shell-fish_: _scale_, _CP_; Æ, AO.
[scalu]

sciellfisc (i, y) m. '_shell-fish_,' _Bo_.

-sciellig (y) v. stân-s.  [[under "stânscylig"]]

scielliht (e) _having a shell_, #Lcd#.

sciendan = scendan

scîene (ê, êo, î, ý) _beautiful_, _Cr, Gen_ (ê), _Pa, Ph_ (ý): _bright,
brilliant, light_, _Cr_ (ý). ['_sheen_']

scîenes (êo, î, ý) f. _suggestion, instigation_, CP. [scýan]

scienn = scinn, scîn

scîenð pres. 3 sg. of scînan.

±scieppan^6 (e, i, y) _to create, form, make_, _Gen_: _order, destine,
arrange, adjudge, assign_, _B, Wy_. ['_shape_,' '_i-shape_']

±Scieppend m. _Creator_, _B_ (y); CP. ['_sheppend_']

±scieran^4 (æ, e, eo, i) _to cleave, hew, cut_, _An, B_: _cut hair_, _Æ,
CP_: _receive tonsure_, _Guth_: _'shear' sheep_, _BC_. pp. scoren
_abrupt_, CP 215^8.

scierden (e) adj. _of sherds_, GPH 400. [sceard]

sciering (e) f. _shearing, shaving_, CM 610.

±scierpan I. _to deck, clothe, equip_, ÆL (y). [sceorp] II. (e, y) _to
sharpen_, _A, VPs_: _rouse_. ['_sharp_']

+scierpla (i, y) _clothing, garments_.

scierseax = scearseax

scîet pres. 3 sg. of scêotan.

scîete (ê, î, ý) f. _cloth, towel, shroud_, _Æ, BH, Cp, Mk, WW_.
['_sheet_']

scife = scyfe

±sciftan _to divide, distribute, allot_, _LL_ (y): _place, order,
arrange_, _LL, W_ (y). ['_shift_']

scild = scield

scild- = scyld-

scildburh ¶ (e, y) f. _shield-wall, phalanx_: _roof of shields,
testudo_: _castle, fortress_, #Sat# 309 (e).

scilden f. _protection_, WW 52^17.

±scild-end, -ere (ie, y) m. _protector, defender_.

scildfreca (y^1) m. _warrior_, B 1033.

scildhete m. _foe_, #An# 85. [scyld]

scildhrêoða (y^1, e^2, ea^2) m. _shield, buckler_: _testudo, phalanx_.

±scildnes (ie) f. _defence, protection_.

scildtruma (y^1) m. _testudo, phalanx_, _Æ, OEG_. ['_sheltron_']

scildung f. _protection_, Æ.

scildweall (y^1) m. _wall of shields_, B 3118.

scildwiga (y^1) m. _warrior_, B 288.

scildwyrhta (y^1) m. _shield-maker_.

scile (CP) pres. subj. of sculan.

scilfix = sciellfisc

scilfor _yellow, golden_, OEG.

scill = sciell

scilling (y) m. _'shilling' (consisting of a varying number of pence),
silver coin_, _Æ, G, LL_ (v. 2·640), _WW_.

scillingrîm n. _count of shillings_, #Wid# 92.

scima m. _ray, light, brightness, effulgence, splendour_, CP: _twilight,
gloom_. [scînan]

scimerian (y) _to glisten, shine_, OEG 23^51; _NC_ 319. ['_shimmer_']

scîmian _to shine, glisten_, _ÆGr, LkL_: _grow dusky, dim, be dazzled,
bleared_, Æ. ['_shim_']

scîn == scinn

scînan^1 (ý) _to 'shine,' flash_, _Æ, BH, Bl, Bo, Cp, Mt_; CP: (+)
_shine upon, illuminate_.

scinbân n. '_shin-bone_,' _WW_.

scinccing (OET p. 26) = sciccing

+scincio np. _the fat about the kidneys_, #Lcd#.

scindan = scendan

scîndlâc = scînlâc

scînefrian _to glitter_, WW 348^19.

scinelâc = scînlâc

scînende '_shining_,' _MH_ (y), _WW_: _eminent, distinguished_, _BH_.

scînendlic _shining_, #LPs# 18^9.

scînfeld (êa) m. _Elysian fields, Temple_.

scîngedwola m. _phantom_, WW 455^11.

scîngelâc § n. _jugglery, magical practices_.

scinhosu f. _greave_, OEG.

scînlâc I. n. _sorcery, magic_: _apparition, spectre, delusion,
superstition_: _frenzy, rage_, AO. II. = scînl¯æce I.

scînl¯æca m. _wizard, magician_, AO(â^2).

scînl¯æce I. _magic, spectral_, AO. II. f. _sorceress, witch_.

scinlic (y) _spectral_, NC 320.

scinn (CP) n., scinna m. _spectre, illusion, apparition, phantom, evil
spirit_.

scinncræft (y) m. _sorcery, magic_, AO.

scinncræftiga m. _sorcerer_, GD 27^15; LL 248[7].

scinnere m. _magician_, #Gl#.

scînnes I. f. _radiance_, MkL 13^24. II. = scîenes

scinnhîw n. _spectre, illusion, phantasm_.

scînsêoc _spectre-haunted_, #Lcd# 1·364^4.

scinu (y) f. '_shin_,' _WW_.

scip (y) n. '_ship_,' _BH, Bo, Cp_; AO, CP.

scîp == scêap

scipbroc n. _hardship on ship-board_, #Bl# 173^6.

scipbrucol (y) _destructive to shipping_, GPH 401^9.

scipbryce m. _right to claim wreckage_, _KC_ 4·208. ['_shipwreck_']

scipýbme (y) f. _ship's trumpet_, GPH 391.

scipcræft m. _naval force_, #Chr# 1048#d#.

scipdrincende _shipwrecked_, DR 61^16.

scipe m. _pay, teage_, _WW_; Æ 31^55: _position, rank_. ['_shipe_']

scipehere = sciphere

scipen (e, y) f. _'shippon,' stall, cattle-shed_, _A, BH_ (y).

scipere (y) m. _shipman, sailor_, _Chr_. ['_shipper_']

scipfæreld n. _voyage_, GD 273^18.

scipfæt n. _a vessel in the form of a ship_, WW 124^8.

scipfarend m. _sailor_, BH 3·15 (title).

scipfêrend m. _sailor_, #An# 250.

scipfierd f. _naval expedition, fleet_, AO.

scipflota m. _sailor, pirate_, #Chr# 937#a#.

scipforðung f. _equipment of ships_, LL 314[´].

scipfultum m. _naval aid, naval reinforcements_, #Chr# 1049#c#.

scipfylleð _private jurisdiction exercised over a group of three
hundreds_, KC 6·240 (v. BT).

scipfyrd = scipfierd

scipfyrdung f. _fleet, naval expedition_: _fitting out of ships_.

scipfyrð(r)ung f. _equipment of ships_.

scipgebroc n. _shipwreck_, AO, CP.

scipgefeoht (y) n. _naval battle_, GPH 389.

scipgefêre n. _sailing_, BH 150^2.

scipgetâwu f. _tackling of a ship_, WW 181^24.

scipgyld n. _ship-tax, ship-money_, Ct.

sciphamor m. _hammer for giving a signal to rowers_, WW.

sciphere m. _naval force, fleet (usu. hostile)_, _squadron, armada_,
AO, #Chr#: _crew of a warship_.

scipherelic _naval_, #HGl# 406^40.

sciphl¯æder f. _ship's ladder_, WW.

sciphlæst (y) m. _ship-load, crew_, AO, CP: _ship of burden_.

sciphlâford m. _master of a ship, skipper_, WW 181^21.

scipian _to take 'ship,' embark_: (±) _man or equip a ship_, _Chr_.

scipincel n. _little ship_, WW.

sciplâd (y) f. _journeying by sea, sailing_, BH 198^29.

sciplæst = sciphlæst

sciplic _naval_, #Gl#.

sciplið n. _naval force_, #Chr# 1055#c#.

sciplîðend m. _seaman, sailor_: _voyager_, ÆL 33^138.

sciplîðende ptc. _sailing_.

scipm¯ærls m. _ship's rope, cable_, WW.

scipmann m. _'shipman,' sailor, rower_, _BH, Chr_ (y): _one who goes on
trading voyages_.

scipp- = sciepp-

sciprâp m. _ship's rope, cable_, AO.

sciprêðra (y) m. _rower, sailor_.

sciprôðor n. _ship's oar or rudder_, WW 455^18.

sciprôwend m. _rower, sailor_, WW 455^14.

scipryne m. _passage for ships_, Ct.

scipsetl n. _bench for rowers_, WW.

scipsôcn f. = scipfylleð

scipsteall (y) m. _place for ships_, BC 3·316^16.

scipstêora m. _steersman, pilot_, CP.

scipsteorra m. _pole-star_, #Lcd# 3·270^20.

scip-stîera, -stýra = scipstêora

scip-tearo, -ter, n., gs. -tearos scip-t(e)ara, -te(o)ra m. _(ship-tar),
bitumen, pitch_.

sciptol m. _passage money_, Æ.

scipwealh m. _servant whose service is connected with ships_? (BT); _one
liable to serve in the fleet_? (Swt), EC 376.

scipweard m. _ship-master_, #An# 297.

scipwered n. _crew_, WW 451^17.

scipwîsan (on) adv. _like a ship_, Æ.

scipwyrhta m. '_shipwright_,' _WW_ 112^5.

scîr I. (ý) f. _office, appointment, charge, authority, supremacy_, _AO,
Cp_; CP: _district, diocese, see, province_, _'shire,' parish_, _AO,
LL_; Æ: _tribe_. II. adj. _bright, gleaming, shining, resplendent_, _B,
Bo_: _clear, translucent_, _Cr, WW_: _pure, unmixed_, _B, Bo_: _white_,
Jn 4^35. ['_shire_']

sciran = scieran

scîran (ý) _to make clear, say, tell, declare_, _B, CP_: _arrange,
determine, decide, decree, act in authority_, CP: (±) _clear from, get
rid of_, AO, CP.

scîrbasu _bright purple_, WW 193^12.

scîrbisceop m. _bishop of a diocese_, WW 173^30.

scîre adv. _brightly_, _An_: _clearly_: _mightily_, _Cr_ 1142.
['_shire_']

scîre- = scîr-

scîrecg _keen-edged_, #Lcd# 1·390^7.

scirenicge (#Rd# 9^9) = scernicge

scîresmann = scîrmann

scirfemûs f. _shrew (mouse)_, WW 477^16. [sceorfan]

scîrgemôt n. _shire-moot_.

scîrgerêfa m. '_sheriff_,' _KC_.

scîrgesceat (ý) n. _property of a see_, Ct.

scîrham _clad in bright mail_, B 1895.

±scirian (e, y) _to ordain, appoint_: _allot, assign, grant_: (+) _mark
off, count, reckon_.

sciriendlic (y) _derivative_, WW 222^23.

scîrigmann = scîrmann

scîrlett n. _piece or measure of land_, Ct.

scîrm¯æled _splendidly marked, brightly adorned_, #Jud# 230.

scîrmann (ý) m. _governor of a shire, prefect, sheriff, steward,
procurator, official_, _KC_; Æ, CP; v. LL 2·649: _inhabitant of a
district_, Æ. ['_shireman_']

scîrnes f. _elucidation_, WW 279^23.

scirp- = scierp-

scirseax = scearseax

scîrðegen m. _thane of a shire_, BC 1·544^8.

scirung f. _separation, rejection_, RB 109^21.

scir-wæter (scyr-) n. _water forming a boundary_, #Chr# 656#e#.
[scieran]

scîrwered _brightly ornamented_? _bright_? #Gu# 1262.

scîrwita m. _chief man of a shire_, W.

scîtan^1 _to ease oneself_.

scîte = scýte

scitefinger = scytefinger

scitol _purgative_, #Lcd# 66a.

scitte f. _purging_, _Lcd_. ['_shit_']

scittels (_Æ_) = scyttels  [[under "scyttel"]]

sclât (#Gl#) = slât pret. 3 sg. of slîtan.

scleacnes (#KGl#) == sleacnes  [[headword spelled "slêacnes"]]

scmêgende (#VPs#) = smêagende pres. ptc. of smêagan.

scnîcend (#Gl#) = snîcend pres. ptc. of snîcan.

scô = scôh

sco- = sceo-

scôas = scôs v. scôh.

scobl = scofl

scôc pret. 3 sg. of sceacan.

scocca = scucca

scocha (= scohha) '_lenocinium_', Ep 579.

scôcnyll m. _signal for putting on shoes_, ANS 84·10.

scôd I. pret. 3 sg. of sceððan. II. v. scôgan.

+scôe = +scý

scôere m. _shoemaker_, _Gl_. ['_shoer_']

scôf pret. 3 sg. of sceafan.

scofen pp. of scufan.

scofettan _to drive hither and thither_, CP 169^13.

scofl f. '_shovel_,' _A, Cp, Ep_.

scôgan pp. sc(ê)od _to 'shoe,'_ _Æ, CP_.

scôh, scô, scêo m. gs. nap. sc(ê)os, gp. sc(ê)one, dp. sc(ê)on, scôum
'_shoe_,' _JnL, Mt, WW_.

scôhere = scôere

scôhnægl m. _shoe-nail_, WW.

scôhðên (êo) m. _shoe-cleaner_, RBL 91^9.

scôian = scôgan

scôl f. '_school_,' _Æ, Lcd_; AO.

+scola m. _debtor_, WW 15^28. [sceal]

+scôla m. _fellow-student_, OEG 2271.

scolde pret. 3 sg. of sculan.

scôlere m. _'scholar,' learner_, _A, LL_.

scolh (WW 241^13) = seolh

scôliere = scôlere

scôlmann m. _scholar, pupil_: _client_.

scolu I. (eo) f. _troop, host, multitude_. ['_school_'] II. = scôl

scom- = scam-

scômhylte (scomm-?) n. _shady copse, thicket_, WW 411^3.

scôn = scêon v. scêoh.

scon- = scan-

scop (eo) m. _singer, poet_, _B, Bo_; AO. ['_scop_']

scôp pret. 3 sg. of scieppan.

scopcræft m. _poetry_, #ÆGr# 215^9.

scopgereord (eo^1) n. _language of poetry_, BH.

scoplêoð n. _poem_, AO.

scoplic _poetic_, OEG 119.

scora m. _hairy garment_, WW 278^1.

scoren pp. of scieran.

scorian (eo) I. _to refuse_, Æ. II. _to jut out_.

scorp = sceorp

scort (eo, y) _'short,' not long, not tall_, _Bo, GD_ (eo): _brief_, _Æ,
Bo, CP_.

scortian _to become 'short,' shorten_, _Lcd_ (eo): (±) _run short,
fail_.

scortlic _brief_, _Sc_ 214^16 (eo). adv. -lîce _'shortly,' briefly,
soon_, _AO_; Æ.

scortnes f. _'shortness,' small amount_: _summary, abstract_, _Æ_ (eo):
_short space of time_.

scortwyrplic (eo) _shortly coming to pass_, #Lcd# 3·156^2.

scoru _a 'score,'_ NC 320. [scoren; scieran]

scôs gs. of scôh.

±scot (eo) n. _'shot,' shooting_, _OEG_; AO: _darting, rapid motion_,
_Men_: _what is shot forth_, _AO, CP_: (+) _scot, payment_: _private
apartment, sanctum, chancel_, Æ.

scoten pp. of scêotan.

+scotfeoht n. _shooting, battle_, #PPs#.

scotfrêo _scot-free, free of tribute_, Ct.

±scotian (co) (tr. and intr.) _to move rapidly, shoot, hurl a
javelin_, Æ.

scotlîra m. _calf of the leg_, #Lcd#.

scotspere n. _dart, javelin_, #HGl# 405.

Scottas mpl. _the Scots_, Æ, CP.

scotung (co) f. _shooting_: _missile_.

scôum v. scôh.

scôung f. _provision of shoes_, LL 450[10].

-scrâd v. scrîðend-s.

  [[Cross-reference does not appear to exist; it may be an error for
  "v. scrîðend [_see_ scrîðan], scrâð" as separate words.

  Entry from first edition:
  scrâd _a moving body_? (v. scrîðan), _a vessel_? _a body of
  travellers_, BT.]]

scrâdung = scrêadung

scræb m. _cormorant_? _ibis_? Cp 1311.

±scræf (ea, e) n. [obl. cases occly. have scraf-] _cave, cavern, hole,
pit_, Æ, CP: _hovel_, Æ.

+scr¯æpe = +scrêpe

scrætte f. _adulteress, prostitute_, #Gl#. [_L._ scratta]

scr¯æwa = scrêawa

scrâf pret. 3 sg. of scrîfan.

scraf- v. scræf.

scrallettan ¶ intr. _to sound loudly_.

scranc pret. 3 sg. of scrincan.

scrapian _to scrape_, _IM_. ['_shrape_']

scrâð pret. 3 sg. of scrîðan.

scrêad, scrêade f. _'shred,' cutting, scrap_, _WW_.

±scrêadian _to 'shred,' peel, prune, cut off_, _Æ_.

scrêadung (â) f. _shred, cutting, fragment_, _MtL_: _pruning, trimming_,
_WW_. ['_shredding_']

scrêadungîsen n. _pruning-knife_, _WW_. [v. '_shredding_']

screaf = scræf

scrêawa m. _'shrew' (mouse)_, _Gl_.

screb = scræb

scrêc = scrîc

scref = scræf

scremman _to cause to stumble_, Æ.

±screncan _to cause to stumble, ensnare, deceive_, _CP, Ps_: (+) _cause
to shrink or shrivel_, _MtL_ 13^6. ['_shrench_']

+scrence _withered, dry_, LkL 6^8.

+screncednes f. _tripping up_, #CVPs# 40^10.

screodu v. scrid.

+scrêope = +scrêpe

screopu = screpu

screpan^5 _to scrape, scratch_, _Lcd, MkR_. ['_screpe_']

scrêpan _to become dry, withered_, MkR 9^18.

±scrêpe (¯æ, êo) _suitable, adapted, fit_. adv. -lîce.

+scrêpnes (oe) f. _convenience_, Cp 568.

screpu (eo) f. _strigil, curry-comb_, #Gl#.

scrêwa = scrêawa

scrîban (#Gl#) = scrîfan

scrîc (ê, û) _shrike, missel-thrush_? #Gl#.

scrid I. n. nap. screodu _vehicle, chariot, litter_. II. _quick, fleet_,
#An# 496.

scrîdan = scrýdan

scridon pret. pl. of scrîðan.

scridw¯æn m. _chariot_: _curule chair_.

scridwîsa m. _charioteer_, WW 150^14.

+scrif n. _judgement, edict_, WW.

±scrîfan^1 _prescribe, ordain, allot, assign, impose (punishment)_,
_LL_; Æ: _hear confession, 'shrive,'_ _LL_: _have regard to, be troubled
about, care for_, CP.

scrifen ptc? _painted_? #Rim# 13.

scrift m. _prescribed penalty or penance_, _LL_: _absolution_, _LL_:
_confessor_, _CP, Cr_; Æ: _judge_. tô scrifte gân _to go to confession_,
_W_. ['_shrift_']

scriftbôc f. _book of penances_.

scriftscîr f. _confessor's area of jurisdiction_: _diocese_, LL 164[26].

scriftspr¯æe f. _confession_, LL.

scrimman^3 _to shrink, contract_, _Lcd_ 2b. ['_shrim_']

scrîn (ý) n. _chest, coffer, ark_, _Æ, Jn_: '_shrine_,' _Æ_: _cage (for
criminals)_. [_L._ scrinium]

±scrincan^3 _to 'shrink,' contract, shrivel up, wither, pine away_, _Æ,
AO, Lcd_.

scrind f. _swift course_? #PPs# 103^24.

scringan = scrincan

-scripel (y) v. ear-s.

scrîpen, scrîpende '_austerus_,' LkLR 19^21.

scripeð (_Cp_) pres. 3 sg. of screpan.

scripp m? _scrip, bag_, ÆH 1·394.

scritta m. _hermaphrodite_, WW.

scrið (v. OEG 2185) = scrid I.

scrîðan^1 _to go, move, glide_, _B, Gu_. ['_scrithe_'; _Ger._ schreiten]

scriðe m. _course_, #Met# 28^11.

-scrîðol v. wîd-s.

scroepe, scrôpe = scrêpe

scrofel n? _scrofula_, #Lcd# 182a.

scrûc = scrîc

scrûd n., ds. scrýd _clothing, dress_: _garment, vestment_, _Æ, WW_.
['_shroud_']

scrûdelshûs n. _sacristy, vestry_, ANS 84^15. [scrýdan]

scrûdfeoh n. _money for buying clothes_, NC 320.

scrûdfultum m. _grant towards providing clothes_, Ct.

scrûdland n. _land bequeathed as provision for clothing_, Ct.

scrûdnian = scrûtnian

scrûdwaru f. _garb_, LL.

scruf [_Lcd_] = scurf

scruncon pret. pl. of scrincan.

scrûtnian (ûd) _to examine, scrutinize, consider_, Æ.

scrûtnung (ûd) f. _search, investigation_, #Lcd, ERPs#.

scrybb f. _scrub, brushwood_, TC 525^22.

scrýd v. scrûd.

±scrýdan _to clothe, dress_, _Æ_ (î), _Bl, Lk, Mt_. ['_shride_']

scryft = scrift

scrynce _withered_, JnL 5^3.

scua m. _shadow, shade, darkness_: _protection_.

scucca m. _sprite, evil spirit, demon_, _B, Bo, Mt_ (eo): _the devil_.
['_shuck_']

scuccen (eo) _devilish_, NC 319.

scuccgyld (eu^1) n. _idol_, #PPs# 105^26.

scûdan^2 _to run, hurry_? #Gu# 828.

scûfan^2 (êo) _to 'shove,' thrust, push_, _Æ, Ma, MH_; Æ: _push with
violence, urge, impel_, _Met_: _push out, expel, deliver up_: (¶)
_display_: (intr.) _to move, go_.

sculan anv. pres. 1 sing, sce(a)l(l), scal, pl. sculon (eo), pret.
sc(e)olde, sc(e)alde _to be obliged_ (_'shall,' have to, must, must
needs, am bound to, ought to_), _Æ, AO, Bo, CP_: _owe_, _Mt, Lk_.

scul-dor m., nap. -dru, -dra, +scyl-dru, -dre '_shoulder_,' _Bl, Ep,
Lcd_.

sculdorhrægl n. _cape_, WW 327^24.

sculdorwærc m. _pain in the shoulders_, #Lcd#.

sculdur = sculdor

scule pres. subj. of sculan.

sculthêta (WW) = scyldl¯æta

±scunian _to 'shun,' avoid_, _Guth_: _be afraid_, _DR_: (tr.) _abhor_,
_TC_.

scunung f. _abomination_, LHy 6^23 (? for on-s.).

scûr (êo) m(f). _'shower,' storm, tempest, trouble, commotion, breeze_,
_An_ (êo), _LkR, Ps_; CP: _storm of battle_? _shower of blows_? #Jud#
79.

scûra ¶ m. _shower (of rain)_.

scûrbeorg f. _roof_, #Ruin# 5.

scûrboga m. _rainbow_, #Gen# 1540.

±scurf (eo) n. '_scurf_,' _BH_: _a skin-disease_, _Lcd_.

scûrfân _rainy, stormy_, A 9·369; MF.

scurfede ptc. _rough, scabby_, #Lcd#.

scurfende ptc. _scabby_, #Lcd#.

scûrheard ¶ _made hard by blows (epithet of a sword)_.

scûrsceadu § f. _protection against storms_.

scutel I. m. _dish, platter_, _WW_ 280^22. ['_scuttle_'] II. = scytel

scuton pret. pl. of scêotan.

scuwa = scua

+scý npl. _pair of shoes_.

scýan? scýn? _to suggest, persuade, prompt, incite, tempt_.

scyccel, scyccels = sciccels

scydd m. _twist on a hillside_? (Earle); _alluvial ground_? (BT), KC.

scýde pret. 3 sg. of scêon and scýan, scýn.

scyfe (e, i) m. _shove, pushing, precipitation, furtherance,
instigation_, CP. tô +sc. _head-long_.

scyfel, scyfele f. _woman's hood, head-dress_, #Gl#.

scýft pres. 3 sg. of scûfan.

scyftan = sciftan

+scýgean _to furnish with shoes_, TC 616^26.

scyhhan _to shy (of a mule)_, ES 43·318.

scyhte ¶ pret. of a vb. *scyccan? _impelled, prompted, urged_, #Gen#
898; #Gu# 98.

scyl I. _sonorous, shrill_, #Rim# 27. ['_shill_'] II. = sciell

scylcen f. _female servant, slave, concubine_, ÆH 2·162^33. [scealc]

±scyld I. (e) f. _offence, fault, crime, guilt, sin_, CP: _obligation,
liability, due, debt_, CP. [sculan; _Ger._ schuld] II. = scield

scyld- = scield-, scild-

+scyldan _to accuse_, LL 156[11].

scyldfrecu f. _wicked craving_, #Gen# 898.

scyldful _sinful, guilty_.

scyldgian _to sin_: (+) _place in the position of a criminal, render
liable to punishment_.

scyldgung f. _sum demanded as_ 'wergeld,' LL 156[11].

scyld-hata, -hete ¶ m. _enemy_.

scyldian = (1) scyldgian; (2) scyldan

scyldig (e, i) (usu. w. g.) _guilty, criminal, sinful_, _Æ, B_; CP.
ealdres sc. _having forfeited his life_: _liable, responsible, in debt
to_, CP. ['_shildy_']

scyldigian = scyldgian

scyldignes f. _guilt_, DR.

scyld-l¯æta [-h¯æta? cp. sculthêta] m. _bailiff_, WW 230^20.

scyldlêas _guiltless_, #Lcd#.

scyldo = scyld I.

+scyldru v. sculdor.

scyldu = scyld I.

scyldung = (1) scildung; (2) scyldgung

scyldwîte n. _fine for a crime of violence_, LL 567[38].

scyldwreccende ptc. _avenging sin_, #Cr# 1161.

scyldwyrcende ¶ _evil-doing_.

scyle pres. subj. of sculan.

scylêagede = sceolhêgede  [[under "sceolhêge"]]

scylf m. _crag, peak_, Mdf: _pinnacle, turret, tower_, Æ.

-scylfan v. â-s.

scylfe m. _shelf_: _floor_.

scylfig _rocky_, OEG (scylp-).

scylfisc = sciellfisc

scylfor = scilfor

scylfrung (i) f. _shaking, swinging_? #Bl# 99^34; WW.

scylfð pres. 3 sg. of scelfan.

scylga = scealga

scylian (= ie) only in sc. of mâle _to pay off, discharge_, _Chr_ 1049.
['_shill_']

scyll = sciell

scyllan _to resound, sound loudly_, _WW_ 215^15. ['_shill_']

scylling = scilling

scylp == scylf

scyltumend m. _helper_, #PPs# 27^8.

scylun (N) = sculon pres. pl. of sculan.

scymrian = scimerian

scýn v. scýan.

scýn- = scîn-

±scyndan I. (e) (tr., intr.) _to hurry, hasten, drive forward, impel_:
_incite, exhort_, CP. II. = scendan

scyndel m. _disreputable person_? A 8·321.

scyndendlîce adv. _hastily_, WW.

+scyndnes = +sceandnes  [[redirected to "scandnes"]]

scýne = scîene

scýnes, scýnnes = scîenes

+scynian _to shun, dread_, DR 32^5.

scynn n. _skin, fur_, #Chr# 1075#d#. [_ON._]

scynu (_WW_ 307^27) = scinu

scyp I. m. _patch_, v. ES 43·316. II. (_Chr_ 1048) = scip

scypen = scipen

scypian _to take shape_, #Lcd# 3·146^15.

scypp- = sciepp-

scyr- = scear-, scier-, scir-

scýr == scîr

±scyrdan (ie) _to harm, injure, destroy_. [sceard]

+scýrdan = +scrydran  [[variant of "scrýdan"?]]

scyrf = scurf

scyrft _scarifying_? _scraping_? Cp 130#s#.

scyrfð pres. 3 sg. of sceorfan.

scýrm¯ælum adv. _stormily_, #Bo# 47^25. [scûr]

scyrp- = scierp-

±scyrtan tr. _to shorten_: intr. _run short, decrease, fail_. [sceort]

scyrte f. _skirt_, GPH 393. ['_shirt_']

scyrtest superl. of scort.

scyrting f. _shortening, abstract, epitome_, Æ.

scyrtra comp. of scort.

scýt pres. 3 sg. of scêotan.

scyte (ê) m. _shooting, hurling_, AO: _stroke, blow_, _ZDA_: _dart_.
['_shute_'; scêotan]

scýte f. _'sheet,' linen cloth_, _BH, Cp, Mk_. [scêat]

scytefinger m. _forefinger_.

scyte-heald, -healden _inclined, sloping, precipitous_, #Gl#.

scytel I. (u) m. _dart, arrow_, _Erf, Ps_: _tongue of a balance_.
['_shuttle_'] II. m. _excrement_. [scîtan]

scytelfinger = scytefinger

scytels = scyttel

scyter¯æs m. _headlong rush_, WW 426^7.

scytere m. _shooter_, Ct.

scytheald = scyteheald

scytta m. _shooter, archer_, Æ, AO.

scyttan (usu. for-sc.) _to bolt_, _'shut' to_, _Æ_: _discharge, pay
off_.

scyttel, scyttels (e, i) m. _bolt, bar_, _Æ, Bl, ZDA_ (e). ['_shuttle_';
scêotan]

Scyttisc I. _Scotch, Irish_. II. _Irish or Scotch language_. [Scottas]

scyððan = sceððan

sê m., sêo f., ðæt n. pers. (dem.) pron. _he, she, it, that, this_: rel.
pron. _who, which_: def art. '_the_.' II. = s¯æ. III. = swâ

sêa (_OET_) = sêaw

sêad (NG) = sêod

sêada = sêaða

seafian (NG) = seofian

seah pret. 3 sg. of sêon.

seaht = seht I.

seal = sealh

sealde pret. 3 sg. of sellan.

±sealdnes f. _act of giving_, WW 389^35: _grant, gift_, Ct.

sêales gs. of sealh.

sealf (a) f. _'salve,' ointment, unguent, medicament_, _Lcd, Mk_; CP.

sealfbox (e) m. _salve-box_, G, #Bk#.

sealfcynn n. _an unguent_, WW 351^30.

sealfe = sealf

sealfer- = seolfer-, seolfor-

±sealfian _to 'salve,' anoint_, _WW_.

sealfie = salfie

sealf-l¯æcnung, -l¯æcung (WW 114^16) f. _curing by unguents, pharmacy_.

sealh (a) m., gs. sêales _willow_, _Lcd, Ps_; Mdf. ['_sallow_']

sealhrind f. _willow-bark_, #Lcd#.

seallan = sellan

sealm (a, eo) m. _'psalm,' song_, _RB, Ps_; Æ, CP.

sealma (e) m. _bed, couch_.

sealmcwide m. _psalm_, #LPs# 97^5.

sealmfæt n. only in phr. 'on sealmfatum,' '_in vasis psalmorum_,' #PPs#
70^20.

sealmgetæl n. _number of psalms_, RB.

sealm-glîg, -glîw n. _psaltery, psalmody_, #LRPs#.

sealmian _to play an accompaniment on the harp_, _Ps_ 107^1. ['_psalm_']

sealmlêoð n. _psalm_, #BlPs# 56^9.

sealmlof n. _psalm_, #LPs#.

sealmlofian _to sing psalms_, #LPs# 104^2.

sealmsang m. _psalm_: _composition or singing of psalms_, Æ: _psaltery_,
#CPs# 32^2.

sealmscop (eo^2) m. _psalmist_, Æ, CP.

sealmtraht m. _exposition of psalms_, Æ.

sealmwyrhta m. _psalmist_, _Æ_. ['_psalm-wright_']

sealobrûn = salubrûn

sealt I. n. '_salt_,' _Lcd, Mt_ (a); CP. II. adj. _salt, briny_, _Cr_;
AO, CP. [v. Mdf]

sealtan^7 _to 'salt,'_ _IM_.

sealtbrôc (a) m. _brook running from salt-works_? KC 3·206^30.

sealtere I. m. _'salter,' salt-worker_, _WW_; Æ. II. (CM 362, 679) =
saltere

sealtern n. _salt-works_, _BC_. ['_saltern_']

sealtfæt n. _salt-cellar_, _A, WW_. ['_saltfat_']

sealthâlgung f. _consecration of salt_, OET 587 (a^1).

sealtherpað (a) m. _road to salt works_, KC 3·206^26.

sealthûs n. '_salt-house_,' _WW_.

sealtian _to dance_. [_L._ saltare]

sealticge f. _dancer_, MH 156^14.

sealting f. _dancing_, NC 320.

sealtlêaf n. _'mozicia,' a plant_? WW.

sealtmere m. _brackish pond_, EC 449^30.

sealtnes f. '_saltness_,' _VPs_ (a).

sealtsæleða m. _saltness_, #LPs# 106^34; #RPs# (y).

sealtsêað m. _saline spring_, BH 26^22.

sealtstân m. _rock salt_, #Lcd# 1·374^14: _pillar of salt_, _Gen_; Æ.
['_saltstone_']

sealtstr¯æt f. _road to salt-works_, Ct.

sealtwîc n. _a place where salt is sold_, KC.

sealtwylle f. _salt spring_, _KC_ (a). ['_saltwell_']

sealtýð ¶ f. _salt wave, sea-wave_.

sêam I. m. _burden, load_, _Æ, LkL, LkR_ (êo): _bag_: _harness of a
beast of burden_, Æ: _duty of furnishing beasts of burden_. [_'seam_']
II. m. '_seam,' suture, junction_, _Æ, WW_.

sêamere I. m. _beast of burden, mule_, WW. [_L._ sagmarius] II. m.
_tailor_, Æ. [sêam II.]

sêamestre f. _sempstress_, _(also of males) sewer, tailor_, _Æ, KC, WW_.
['_seamster_']

sêamhors n. _pack-horse_, WW 119^42.

sêampending m. _toll of a penny a load_, KC.

sêamsadol m. _pack-saddle_, WW 119^41.

sêamsticca m. _an appliance used in weaving_, LL 455[15,1].

sêap pret. 3 sg. of sûpan.

sêar _dry_, _'sere,' barren_, _GPH_ 402^69.

seara-, seare- = searo-

sêargian = sârgian

sêarian _to become sere, wither_, _Shr_. ['_sear_']

searo (searu) n. _art, skill, cleverness, cunning_: _device, trick,
snare, ambuscade, plot, treachery_, Æ, AO, CP: _work of art, cunning
device, engine (of war)_: _armour, war-gear, trappings_.

searobend m. _artistic clasp_, B 2086.

searobunden _cunningly fastened_, #Rd# 56^4.

searoc¯æg f. _insidious key_, #Gu# 1118.

searocêap n. _artistic object_, #Rd# 33^7.

searocêne _very bold_, ¶#PsC# 10.

searocræft m. _artifice, treachery, wile_, Æ: _artistic skill, art_:
_engine, instrument (of torture)_, Æ.

searocræftig _skilful, cunning_.

searofær n. _artistic ship_? #Rim# 65.

searofâh _variegated, cunningly inlaid_, B 1444.

searogemme = searogimm

searogimm m. _curious gem_.

searogrim _fierce, formidable_, B 594.

searohæbbend ¶ m. _warrior_.

searohwît _brilliantly white_, #Rim# 67.

searolic _artistic, ingenious, cunning_. adv. -lîce.

searomete m. _dainty, delicacy_, NC 321.

searonet n. _armour-net, corslet_, B 406: _ensnaring net_, #An# 64; 945.

searonîð ¶ m. _cunning hostility, treachery, strife, battle_.

searopîl m. _artistic javelin_, #Rd# 87^2.

searorûn f. _mystery_, #Creat# 15.

searos¯æled _cleverly bound_, #Rd# 24^16.

searoðanc m. _sagacity, ingenuity, skill_, CP: _cunning, artifice_.

searoðancol _shrewd, wise_.

searowrenc (y^1, a^2) m. _artifice, trick_, AO.

searowundor n. _strange object_, B 920.

searu == searo

searw- v. searo.

searwian (æ) _to be deceitful, dissimulate, cheat_.

searwum (dp. of searo) _skilfully_.

searwung = sierwung

seatul, seatl (NG) = setl

sêað I. (¯æ) m. _hole, pit_, _MkL_; CP; Mdf: _well, cistern, spring,
fountain, lake_, Mdf. ['_seath_'; sêoðan] II. pret. 3 sg. of sêoðan.

sêaða m. _heartburn_? #Lcd# 21a.

sêaw m. _sap, juice, moisture_, _Lcd_. ['_sew_']

+sêaw _succulent_, #Lcd# 95b.

seax n. _knife, hip-knife, short sword, dirk, dagger_, _Æ_ (e), _B, Cp_
(æ); CP. ['_sax_']

seaxbenn (siex-) f. _dagger-wound_, B 2904.

Seaxe, Seaxan mpl. (gp. Seaxna) _Saxons_, AO.

Seaxland (e) n. _England_, #Shr# 16^4.

±sêcan I. _to search for, 'seek' ('i-seche'), inquire, ask for, look
for_, _B, Bo, BH, Jul_; Æ: _strive after, long for, wish, desire_, _Jn_;
CP. s. on, tô _look to for, expect from_, CP: _visit, go to_, _AO, B_;
Æ: _approach, attain to_, _Bl, Ps_: _attack, pursue_, _B, Chr_; AO: _go,
move, proceed_, _Æ_. II. (#KGl#) = sýcan

secce (B 600) = sæcce, gs. of sacu.

secful (#KGl#) = sacful

secg I. m. (n) _'sedge,' reed, rush, flag_, _Gl, Lcd, WW_; Mdf. II. ¶ f.
_sword_. III. ¶ m. _man, warrior, hero_, _B_. ['_segge_'] IV. m.
_ocean_, OET.

secga m. _sayer, informant_, LL 396[4].

±secgan (æ) _to 'say' ('i-seggen'), speak, inform, utter, tell, recite_,
_Æ, Bl, G_; AO, CP, Æ: _signify, mean_, _Æ_: _attribute to_: (+)
_avoid_? LkL p 3^8. s. on _accuse of, charge with_, Æ.

secge f. _speech_, #Cr# 190.

secgend m. _speaker, narrator_, CP.

secggan = secgan

secggescere f. _grasshopper_, Cp 464.

secgihtig _sedgy_, WW 200^27.

secglêac n. _sedge-leek, rush-garlic_, #Lcd#.

secgplega m. _sword-play, battle_, #An# 1355.

secgrôf _brave_? #Ruin# 27.

secgscara m. _landrail, corncrake_, WW 287^11 and #n#.

sêcnes f. _visiting_, LkR 19^44 (oe).

sêd (#VPs#) = s¯æd

+sêdan _to satisfy_, #PPs# 106^8. [sæd]

sêde = sægde pret. 3 sg. of secgan.

sedinglîne = stedinglîne

±sedl (NG) = setl

sefa (eo) m. _mind, spirit, understanding, heart_, ¶CP 9^10.

sêfer- = sýfer-

sefian = seofian

sêfre = sýfre

sêft comp. adv. _more softly_.

±sêfte _soft, pleasant, comfortable, easy_: _gentle, mild_: _effeminate,
luxurious_.

sêftêadig _prosperous_, #Seaf# 56.

sêftlic _luxurious_, AS 38^3.

sêftnes f. _rest, quietness, tranquillity, peace_, Æ, AO.

segc- = secg-

segel == segl

segen = (1) sægen; (2) segn

+segenlic (A) = +sewenlic

segg = secg

segl I. mn. '_sail_,' _AO, Bo, MH_; Æ: _veil, curtain_, #Cr# 1139:
_pillar of cloud_, #Ex#. II. = sigel

±seg-lan, -lian (i) _to 'sail,'_ _AO_: (+) _equip with a sail_.

seglbôsm m. _bellying sail_, #Gl#.

seglger¯æde n. _sail-tackle_, TC 549^17.

seglgyrd mf. _sail-yard, yard, cross-pole_, _Cp_ (e^2), _WW_.

seglian = seglan

seglrâd f. _(sail-road), sea_, B 1429.

seglrôd f. _sail-rod, sail-yard_. [v. '_rood_']

seglung f. '_sailing_,' _BH_.

segn mn. _sign, mark, token_, _Gen_: _ensign, banner_, _BH_. ['_senye_';
_L._ signum]

segnberend m. _warrior_.

segnbora m. _standard-bearer_, #Rd# 41^20.

segncyning m. _king before whom a banner is borne_ (BT), #Ex# 172.

segne f. _'seine,' drag-net_, _Ex, JnL_.

±segnian (¯æn) _to make the sign of the cross, cross oneself, consecrate,
bless_, _Æ, BH_. ['_sain_']

segnung f. _blessing, consecration_.

sêgon = sâwon pret. pl. of sêon.

seh (#VPs#) = seoh imperat. of sêon.

seht I. mf. _settlement, arrangement, agreement_, _KC_: _friendship,
peace_, _BH_ (ea). II. adj. _reconciled, agreed, at peace_, _BC_.
['_saught_']

±sehtian _to conciliate, settle_, _LL_. ['_saught_']

±sehtlian (a, æ) _to reconcile, to come to an agreement_, #Chr#.

±sehtnes f. _agreement, reconciliation, peace_, _Æ_. ['_saughtness_']

sêhð = sêcð pres. 3 sg. of sêcan.

±sehðe [= seh ðu] interj. _behold!_

seigl = segl

seign = segn

seim _fat_, #EPs# 62^6. [_Late L._ sagimen]

seista = siexta

sel sn. = sæl

sêl I. adj. comp. sêlra (_Mt_), sêlla (_B_), sýlla, superl. sêlest
(_Lk_), sêlost _good, great, excellent, clever, skilful_, AO: _noble,
honourable_: _fitting, fit, advisable_: _sound, healthy, happy,
prosperous_. [v. '_sele_'] II. (¯æ) comp. adv. (also sêlor) superl.
sêlost _better, more effectually, rather, sooner, in preference_, Æ, CP.
[s¯æl]

sêlan (OET, Ct) = s¯ælan I.

selcûð = seldcûð

seld ¶ (æ) I. n. _hall, palace, residence_. II. n. _seat, throne, daïs_,
_VPs_. ['_seld_']

+selda ¶ _comrade, retainer_.

seldan adv., comp. seldor, seldnor, superl. seldost _'seldom,' rarely_,
_CP_; Æ.

seldcûð _unusual, rare, strange, novel_, _Bo_; Æ: _various_, _WW_.
['_selcouth_']

seldcyme m. _infrequent coming_, #Rd# 1^14.

selde f. _vestibule_, WW 183^99.

seldguma m. _retainer_? B 249.

seld-hwanne (CP), -hwænne (Æ) adv. _seldom, rarely_.

seldlic _rare, strange, wondrous_, _B_ (syll-), _Met_ (sell-): _select,
choice, excellent_. adv. -lîce, Æ. ['_selly_']

seldnor, seldor, seldost v. seldan.

seldon = seldan

seld-sîene (_AO_), -sýnde (_KC_) _rare, extraordinary, unfamiliar_.
['_seldseen_']

seldun (_CP_), seldum (_Sol_) = seldan

sele m. _hall, house, dwelling, prison_. [_Ger._ saal]

+sele m. _tabernacle_, #EPs# 14^1.

seledrêam ¶ m. _hall-joy, festivity_.

seleful n. _hall-goblet_, B 619.

selegesceot n. _'tabernaculum,' tent, lodging-place, nest_, M. [_Ger._
geschoss]

selegyst m. _hall-guest_, B 1545.

selen (y) f. _grant, gift_: _tribute_, MkL p5^1: _munificence_, OEG.
[sellan]

±selenes f. _tradition_: (+) _giving_, DR.

seler¯ædend ¶ m. _hall ruler or possessor_.

selerest f. _bed in hall_, B 690.

selescot = selegesceot

selesecg m. _retainer_, #Wa# 34.

selest pres. 2 sg., seleð pres. 3 sg. of sellan.

sêlest v. sêl.

seleðegn § m. _hall-thane, retainer, attendant_.

seleweard m. _hall-warden_, B 667.

self I. (eo, i, y) pron. (str. and wk.) '_self_,' _AO, B, CP_. mid him
selfum _by himself_: _own_, _B_: adj. _same_, _CP_. II. == sealf

self¯æta (y) m. _cannibal_, #An# 175.

self¯æte f. _a plant, wild oat_? #Lcd#.

selfbana (o^2) m. _one who takes his own life_.

selfcwala (y) m. _one who takes his own life_.

selfcwalu (y) f. _suicide_, #Wy# 56.

selfdêma, self-demere (RB), -dêmende (OEG 58^19) (y) m. _'sardbaita,'
monk living, subject only to his own rules_.

selfdôm m. _doing as one likes, independence_.

selfe v. swâ.

selflic (y) _spontaneous, voluntary_, OEG.

selflîce I. n. _self-love_, _'amour propre,' pride, vanity_, CP:
_egotism_, CP 25^7. II. adj. _egotistic, puffed up, vain_, CP.

selfmyrðra (y) m. _one who takes his own life_, WW 424^25.

selfmyrðrung (y) f. _suicide_.

selfren = seolfren

selfsceafte _not begotten_, #Gen# 523.

selfswêgend (y) m. _vowel_.

selfwealdlîce (eo^1, e^2) _arbitrarily_.

selfwill n. _own will, free-will_.

selfwille _spontaneous, voluntary_, _Bo, Met_. adv. -willes, _Æ, RB_
(y). ['_selfwill_']

selfwillende _voluntary_, #LPs# 67^10.

selfwillendlîce _indulgently_, GD 289^5.

selian = sylian

sêlig == s¯ælig

sêlla = sêlra, v. sêl.

±sellan (ea, i, ie, y) (w. d. pers. and a. thing) _to give, furnish,
supply, lend_, _Æ, B, Mt_; AO, CP: _give up, betray_, _JnL_: _entrust,
deliver to_: _lay by, hide_, WW 212^41: '_sell_,' _Æ, Jn_: _promise_.
âð s. _make oath, swear_, LL.

sellen = selen

sellend (y) m. _giver_: _betrayer_.

sellendlic adj. _to be given_, NC 321.

sellic = seldlic

selma (#Gl#) = sealma

selmerige = sælmerige

selnes = selenes

sêlor, sêlost, sêlra v. sêl.

selt- = sælt-, sylt-

selð pres. 3 sg. of sellan.

sêlð = s¯ælð

+sêm n. _reconciliation_, LL 10[10].

sêma (î, ý) m. _arbitrator, judge_, #ÆGr#, GD.

±sêman I. _to smooth over, put right, settle, reconcile, pacify_, _AO,
Chr, LL_. ['_seem_,' '_i-seme_'] II. = sîeman

sêmann (#Run# 45) = s¯æmann

sêmend (¯æ) m. _conciliator, arbitrator_, LL.

sêmestre = sêamestre

semian = seomian

semle = simble

semnendlic _sudden_, GB 235^4. adv. -lîce _by chance_.

semninga (M) = samnunga

semtinges = samtinges

senap = senep

±sencan, tr. _to sink, plunge (in water)_, _submerge, drown_. [sincan]

sendan I. (±) _to 'send' ('i-send'), send forth, despatch_, _BH, Bl, CP,
MtL_; Æ, AO: _impel, drive_, _MkL_: _throw, hurl, cast_: _put, place,
lay_. II. _to feast, banquet_, B 600? [sand]

senderlîce (#KGl# 74^27) = synderlîce

senderlîpe (#HGl#) = synderlîpe

sendlic adj. _about to be sent (on a journey)_, RBL 113^4.

sendnes f. _sending_, WW.

+sêne = +sîene

senep m. _mustard_. [_L._ sinapi]

seneps¯æd n. _mustard-seed_, #Lcd#.

sengan (æ) _to 'singe,' burn slightly_, _LL_ 449[6,2].

sênian = segnian

senn (#HGl# 519) = synn

senop = senep

senoð (#Chr#) = sinoð

senscipe = sinscipe

senst, sent = sendest, sendeð pres. 2 and 3 sg. of sendan.

senu = sinu

sêo I. f. gas. sêo(n) _pupil (of eye)_, Æ. II. pron. v. sê. ['_she_']
III. gs. of s¯æ. IV. pres. 1 sg. of sêon. V. pres. 2 sg. subj. of bêon
(wesan).

sêoc _'sick,' ill, diseased, feeble, weak_, _Bl, Bo, Chr_; Æ, CP: (¶)
_wounded_: _morally sick, corrupt_, _Jul, RB_: _sad, troubled_,
_FAp, Gu_.

sêocan = sêcan

sêoclian = sîclian

sêocmôd _delicate (in health)_, NC 321.

sêocnes f. _'sickness,' disease_, _LL, W_: _a disease_, _Lcd_ 3·126.

sêod (êa) m. _scrip, purse, bag_, Æ.

seodo, seodu = sidu

seofa = sefa

seofafald (DR) = seofonfeald

seofan, seofen = seofon

seofeð- = seofoð-

seofian (e, ea, i, y) _to sigh, lament_, CP.

seofon '_seven_,' _Æ, AO, BH_.

seofonfeald '_sevenfold_,' _A, Æ, BB_.

seofonfealdlîce adv. _seven times_.

seofongetel (e^2) _the number seven_, OEG 1533.

seofonlêafe f. _tormentilla, setfoil (plant)_, #Lcd# 1·232.

seofonniht fp. _week_.

seofonnihte adj. _seven days old_, #Lcd#.

seofon-têoða (AO), -te(o)g(e)ða '_seventeenth_,' _BH_.

seofontîene '_seventeen_,' _BH_ (y^3); AO.

seofontîenenihte _seventeen days old_, #Lcd# 3·180.

seofontîenewintre _seventeen years old_, AO 190^30.

seofontig _seventy_, AO.

seofontîne = seofontîene

seofonwintre (y) _seven years old_.

seofoða I. '_seventh_,' _MtL_; Æ, AO, CP. II. = sifeða

seofoðe _seventhly_, LL 158[18].

seofung f. _lamentation_. [seofian]

seoh imperat. of sêon.

seohhe f. _sieve_. [sêon II.]

seohhian _to drain, filter_, ÆP 172^31.

seohter m., seohtre (i) f. _drain, ditch_, Ct (Mdf).

seolc, seol-oc, -uc m. _'silk,' silken cloth_, _Bo_ (io), _Lcd_.

-seolcan v. â-s.

seolcen (i) _'silken,' made of silk_, _WW_; Æ.

seolcwyrm m. '_silkworm_,' WW.

sêoles v. seolh.

seolf (#VPs#) = self

seolfer = seolfor

seolfern = seolfren

seolfor (i, io, u, y) n., gs. seolfres _silver_, _CP_; Æ.

seolforfæt n. _silver vessel_, BH 252^16.

seolforgewiht (y) m. _silver-weight_, #Lcd# 3·92^14.

seolforhammen _plated with silver_, EC 225.

seolfor-hilt, -hilted (_TC_) '_silver-hilted_.'

seolforsmið m. '_silversmith_,' _WW_.

seolforstycce m. _piece of silver_, A 9·8.

seolfren (e, i, y) _made of silver, 'silvern,'_ _Bo, Chr_.

seolfring (y) m. _silver coin_, Æ.

seolh m., gs. sêoles '_seal_,' _AO, Lcd, WW_.

seolhbæð n. _seal's bath, sea_, #Rd# 11^11.

seolhpæð? n? _seal's path, sea, ocean_, #An# 1710.

seolm (WW 101^16) = sealm

seoloc, seoluc == seolc

seolofr- = seolfr-

seoloð (io^1, e^2) m. sea, B 2367?

seolufr- = seolfor-, seolfr-

sêom = sêam I.

seomian ¶ (e) _to be tired, lie at rest, tarry, continue, stand_: _hang,
swing, sway_: _lower (as a cloud)_: _lay wait for_, B 161.

sêomint (WW 136^31?) = s¯æminte

±sêon I. (sv^5) _to 'see' ('i-see'), look, behold_, _B, G, Ps, Rd_:
_perceive, understand_, _Cr, Ps_: _inspect, visit_: _experience,
suffer_, _B, Cr_. sîh ðe _lo! behold!_ II. (sv^1) tr. _to sift, strain,
filter_, Æ, AO: intr. _run, ooze, trickle_. III. v. sêo. IV. = sîen

seon- = sin-

seondon = sind pres. pl. ind. of wesan.

sêonian _to languish_, GD 284^2. [_OHG._ siunôn]

seono (i^1, u^2) f. '_sinew_,' #An# (io); _B, Lcd_.

seonobend f. _sinew-band_? #Deor# 6.

seonobenn f. _injury to a sinew_, #Wy# 19.

seonod = sinoð

seonodolg n. _injury to a sinew_, #An# 1408.

seonoð == sinoð

seonwe gs. of seonu.  [[under "seono"]]

seorðan^3 _to lie with_, MtL 5^27. [_ON_?]

seorwum (Cp) = searwum, dp. of searo.

sêoslig _afflicted_, #Gu# 899. [sûsl]

sêota = s¯æta

seotl = setl

seotol = (1) setl; (2) sweotol

seotu nap. of set.

±sêoðan^2 _'seethe,' boil_, _Lcd_ (ý): _be troubled in mind, brood_,
_B_: _afflict, disturb_.

seoððan = siððan

-sêoung (êu) v. êag-s.

sêow pret. 3 sg. of sâwan.

sêowan, sêowian (î, ý) _to 'sew,' knit together, link, unite_, _Æ,
Cp_ (îo).

seox = siex

seoxter = sester

sep (_GPH_ 391) = sæp

sêpan ¶ _to instruct_.

serc m., serce f. (y) _'sark,' shirt_, _WW_: _corslet, coat of mail_.

serede = sierwde pret. 3 sg. of sierwan.

serew- = searw-

serw- = sierw-

serð = seorð, imperat. of seorðan.

sescle f. _sixth part_. [_L._ sextula]

sess m. _place for sitting, seat, bench_.

sessian _to grow calm_, #An# 453.

sesta = siexta

sester (eo, y) m. _a certain measure of bulk_, Æ: _vessel, pitcher_, Æ.
[_L._ sextarius]

set n. (±) _seat, entrenchment, camp, stall, fold_: _setting (of the
sun)_. [sittan]

+set n. _ambush_, DR 37^10.

sêtan = s¯ætian

sete imperat. of settan.

+setednes = +setnes

setel (CP) = setl

seten I. f. _set, shoot, slip_, #VPs#: _plantation_: _occupied_
(_tilled_?) _land_, LL 118[68]. II. pp. of sittan.

+setennes = +setnes

seterndæg = sæterndæg

setgong = setlgang

sethrægl n. _covering for a seat_.

sêtian = s¯ætian

setin (#Gl#) = seten

setl (æ, ea, eo, i, o) n. _seat, stall, sitting, place, residence_, _Æ,
B, BH_; CP. tô setle gân _to set (of the sun_), Æ: _throne_ (_of a king,
or bishop, hence) see_, CP, Æ: _siege_, AO. ['_settle_']

+setl n. _assembly_, OEG 1753.

+setla (æ) m. _one sitting beside_, ÆL 2^237: _assessor, fellow-judge_,
OEG 56^20.

setlan _to 'settle,' (cause to sit), place, put_, _Whale_.

setlgang m. _setting, sinking_, Æ.

setlgangende ptc. _setting_, BH 476^13.

setlhrægel n. _seat-cover_, Ct.

setlrâd f. _setting, sinking_, #Ex# 109.

setlung f. _sitting, setting_.

sêtn- = s¯æt(n)-

±setnes (+ exc. in N) f. _foundation, creation_, _MtL_: _institution,
law, ordinance, decree, will_, _Æ, BH, Mk_: (+) _record, narrative_; (+)
_sentence, paragraph, figure of speech, composition_. ['_i-setness_']

setol = setl

sêton = s¯æton pret. pl. of sittan.

setrægl = sethrægl

settan (±) _to make to sit, 'set' ('i-set'), lay, put, deposit, place,
fix_, _Æ, B, Bl, Bo, Gen, LL_; CP: _set or put down_, _El, LL_; Æ: (±)
_appoint, assign, institute, prepare, ordain, make, found, build_, _Æ,
AO, Bl, BH, Ps_: _sow, plant_, _Cp, Cr, Gen, MtL_: _settle_ (tr. and
intr.), _abate, subside_, _Bl, Lcd_: _compose, compile, write_, _Bo,
Guth_; Æ: _translate_: (+) _people, garrison_, _Bl_: _be situated_,
_MtL_: _set off_: _lay in wait_, #LPs# 9^30. s. ût _issue, send forth,
dismiss_. s. of _displace, depose_. sîð s. _travel, journey_, _El_.
±s. wið, ongean, _compare_. s. tô gafole _let land_. [sittan]

settend m. _creator, ordainer_, #Da# 333.

+settendlic _appointed, canonical_, CM 362.

settere = s¯ætere

setðorn m. _a kind of tree_, EC 291´.

+setu ¶ np. _dwelling, abode_.

sêtung = s¯ætung

±sêðan _to affirm, testify_, Æ: _prove_. [sôð]

seðel (NG) = setl

±sêðend m. _asserter, affirmer_.

+sêðnes f. _affirmation_, NC 296.

seððe = sehðe

±sêðung f. _affirmation, proof_, Æ.

sêw = sêow pret. 3 sg. of sâwan.

sewen = sawen pp. of sêon.

+sewenlic _visible_. adv. -lîce.

sex (NG) = (1) siex; (2) seax

Sexland = Seaxland

sexta = siexta

sî 3 p. sg. pres. subj. of wesan.

sibæðeling m. _related noble_, B 2708.

sibb (y) (v. LL 2·651) f. _relationship_, _AO, B_; Æ: _love,
friendship_: _peace, happiness_, _BH, Chr, VPs_; AO, CP ['_sib_']

±sibb _related, akin_, _B, LkL, W_. as sb. _kinsman, kinswoman_, _W,
Soul_. ['_sib_,' '_i-sib_']

sibb- = sib-

sibbecoss m. _kiss of peace_, ES 33·176.

sibbegedriht = sibgedryht

±sibbian (y) _to conciliate, reconcile_, Æ, CP.

sibbs- = sibs-

sibcwide (y) m. _pacific speech_, #Leas# 29.

sibfæc n. _degree of affinity_, LL.

sibgebyrd f. _blood-relationship_, #Gen# 1901.

sibgedryht ¶ f. _related band_: _peaceful host_.

sibgemâgas mpl. _blood-relations_, #Ex# 386.

sibgeornes f. _pacific disposition, friendship, love_, W.

sibge-sihð, -syhð f. _vision of peace_ (lit. trans. of '_Hierosolyma_'),
#Ps#.

sibi (#Gl#) sibian = sife, sifian

siblâc n. _peace-offering_, LL 146[2].

sibleger n. _incest_.

siblic _of peace, peaceable_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

±sibling m. _relative, kinsman_, Æ. ['_sibling_']

siblufu ¶ f. _friendship, love_.

+sibnes f. _affinity, relationship_, WW 345^16.

sibrêden f. _affinity, relationship_, _Chr_ 1127. ['_sibred_']

±sibsum _peace-loving, peaceable, friendly_, _CP_. adv. -lîce.
[v. '_i-sibb_']

+sibsumian _to reconcile_, Æ.

sibsumnes f. _peace, concord_, _Chr_; CP. ['_sibsomeness_']

+sibsumung f. _peace-making_, WW 172^41.

sibun (Cp) = seofon

sîc n. _runnel, small stream_, _BC_; Mdf. ['_sitch_']

sîcan I. (sv^1) _to sigh, yearn for_, _AO, PPs_. ['_siche_'] II. = sýcan

siccet-, siccett-, siccit- = sicett-

sicclian = sîclian

sice m. _sigh_, _Lcd_ 1·388^11. ['_siche_']

sicel = sicol

sîcelian = sîclian

sicer- = sicor-

sicerian _to trickle, penetrate, ooze_, _CP_ 437^14. ['_sicker_']

sicettan _to sigh, groan, mourn_, CP.

sicettung f. _sighing, sigh, sob, lamentation_, Æ.

sîcle _sick, ill_, ANS 129·21.

±sîclian (¯æ, ê, êo, ý) _to sicken, become ill or weak_, _Lcd_; ÆL.
['_sickle_'; sêoc]

sicol m. '_sickle_,' _A, Mk, WW_ (u^2).

sicor _sure, certain, trustworthy_, _A_: _secure_, _CP_. ['_sicker_']

sicorlîce (e^2) _with full certainty_, _NC_ 321; FM 99. ['_sickerly_']

sicornes f. _sureness, certainty_, _NC_ 321. ['_sickerness_']

sîd _ample, wide, broad, large, vast_, _An, B, Gen_. ['_side_']

sîdâdl f. _pain in the side, pleurisy_, WW 112^32.

sîdan adv. wîdan and s. _far and wide_, _BC_. [v. '_side_']

sîde I. adv. _amply, widely, extensively_, OEG. s. and wîde _far and
wide_, _El_. ['_side_'] II. (±) f. '_side_,' _Æ, Bl, CP, Gl, VPs_.
[_Ger._ seite] III. f. _silk_. [_L._ seta; _Ger._ seide]

sîdece m. _pain in the side_, #Lcd# 172a.

sideful (y) _decorous, modest, pure, virtuous, honest_, _Æ_.
['_sedeful_'] adv. -lîce.

sidefulnes f. _virtue, modesty_, Æ.

sidelic _sober, discreet_, GPH 389.

sidelîce adv. _fitly, suitable_, CP 153.

siden v. ælf-s.

sîden _made of silk_, OEG.

sîdewâre f. _zedoary_, #Lcd# 137b. [_Late L._]

sîdfæðme, sîdfæðmed ¶ _wide-bosomed, capacious (of a ship)_, B.

sîdfeaxe, sîdfeaxode _long-haired_, _Æ_. [v. '_side_']

sîdfolc ¶ n. _great people or number of people_.

sîdian intr. _to extend_? #Rim# 65. [sîd]

+sidian (y) _to arrange, set right, order_. [sidu]

sîdland ¶ n. _extensive land_.

sîdlingweg m. _sidelong way, road that runs obliquely_? (BT), KC
3·446^17.

sido = sidu

sîdrand m. _broad shield_, B 1289.

sidu (eo) m., gds. sida _custom, practice, manner, habit, rite_, CP:
_manners, morality, good conduct, purity_, CP. [_Ger._ sitte]

sidung (y) f. _rule, regulation_, GPH 398.

sîdung (ý) f. _extension, augmentation_, A 8·306.

sîdwærc m. _pain in the side_, GD, #Lcd#.

sîdweg ¶ m. _long road_: (in pl.) _distance_.

sîdwyrm (ý) m. _silk-worm_, WW.

sîe pres. 1 sg. subj. of wesan (bêon).

siehst pres. 2 sg., siehð pres. 3 sg. of sêon.

+siehð = +sihð

sielf = self

siellan = sellan

siellic = seldlic

±sîeman (¯æ) _to load, burden_, _Æ_ (ý), _LkL_ (ê). ['_seam_']

siemle = simble

sîen I. (êo, î, ý) f. _power of sight, sight, vision_, _Jul_ (ý), _Lcd_
(êo): _pupil, eye_. ['_sene_'] II. (= sîn) pl. pres. subj. of wesan.

siendon, sient (= sindon, sind) pl. pres. of wesan.

+sîene (e, i) _seen, visible, evident, plain_, _B_ (y). ['_sene_']

+sîenelic (ê, ý) _visible_, BH 216^14. adv. -lîce.

sierce = serce  [[under "serc"]]

sîere _'sere,' dry, withered_, _BC_ 1·515. [sêarian]

sierian = sierwan

±sierwan (i, y) _to plan, devise, contrive_: _plot, lay snares for,
entrap_, CP: _put on armour_: (+) _fit out, arm, equip_, #Ma# 159.
[searu]

sierwung (ea, y) f. _plotting, artifice, trap, snare, treachery_, Æ.

sieððan = siððan

siex (e, eo, i, y) '_six_,' _AO_.

siexbenn = seaxbenn

siexfeald '_sixfold_,' WW.

siexhund _six hundred_, _AO_. ['_sixhund_']

siexta (e, i, y) '_sixth_,' _Chr_; AO.

siexte (y) _sixthly_, LL 158[17].

siextig (e, i, y) '_sixty_,' _AO_.

sife (y) n. '_sieve_,' _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

sifeða (eo, y) m. and fpl. _siftings, chaff, bran_: _tares, rubbish_.

sifian = seofian

sifiða = sifeða

sîfre = sýfre

siftan (e, y) _to 'sift,'_ _Æ_ (y), _Bo, Cp_.

sifun = seofon

sig = sî 3 p. sing. pres. subj. of wesan (bêon).

+sig n. _victory_, DR 28^2.

sîgan^1 I. (±) _to sink, set (of the sun)_, _decline_, CP: _descend,
fall, fall down_, Æ: _move, advance, go to, approach_. sâh ût _came
out_, Æ. II. _to strain, filter, drain out, ooze, trickle_.

sigbêh (NG) = sigebêah

sigdi (_Ep_) = sîðe

sige I. (y) m. _victory, success, triumph_, _AO, Chr_; Æ, CP. ['_sige_']
II. m. _sinking, setting (of the sun)_, #Met# 13^56. [sîgan]

sige-bêacn, -bêacen n. _banner_, Æ: _emblem of victory, trophy, cross
(of Christ)_, #El#.

sigebêah m. _victor's circlet, crown_.

sigebêam ¶ m. _tree of victory, cross_.

sigebearn ¶ n. _victor-child (Christ)_.

sigebeorht _victorious_.

sigebeorn m. _victorious hero_, #Fin# 38.

sigebrôðor m. _victorious brother_, #An# 183.

sigebýme f. _trump of victory_, #Ex# 565.

sigecempa m. _victorious champion_, ¶#Ps# 50^10.

sigecwên ¶ f. _victorious queen_.

sigedêma ¶ m. _victorious judge_.

sigedryhten m. _lord of victory, God_.

sigeêadig _victorious_, B 1557.

sigefæst _victorious, triumphant_, _BH, Bl_. [v. '_sige_']

+sige-fæstan, -fæstnian (e^2) _to triumph_: _crown as victor_.

sîgefæstnes f. _triumph, victory_.

sigefest == sigefæst

sigefolc ¶ n. _victorious people_.

sigegealdor (y^1) n. _victory-bringing charm_, #Lcd# 1·388^13.

sigegefeoht n. _victory_, BH 158^6.

sigegyrd f. _victory-bringing rod_, #Lcd#.

sigehrêmig ¶ (¯æ) _rejoicing in victory_.

sigehrêð f. _fame gained by victory_? _confidence or joy of victory_? B
490.

sigehrêðig ¶ _victorious, triumphant_.

sigehwîl f. _hour of victory_, B 2710.

sigel I. ¶ (æ, e) m? n? _sun_: _name of the rune for =s=_. II. = sigil

sigelbeorht ¶ _sun-bright, brilliant_.

sigele = sigle

sigelêan n. _reward of victory_.

sigelêas _not victorious, defeated_.

sigelêoð ¶ n. _song of victory_.

Sigelhearwa m. _Ethiopian_, #VPs#.

sigel-hweorfa m., -hwe(o)rfe f. _heliotrope_.

sigelic _victorious_, WW.

sigeltorht ¶ _radiant_.

Sigel-waras, -ware pl. _Ethiopians_.

sigemêce m. _victorious sword_, #Cr# 1531.

sîgend m. _wave_, WW. [sîgan]

siger- = sigor-

sîgere m. _glutton_, OET 72^568.

sigerêaf n. _triumphal robe_, WW 153^15.

sigerian = sigrian

sîgerian _to be gluttonous_, WW 489^14.

sigerîce ¶ _victorious, triumphant_.

sigerôf ¶ _victorious, triumphant_.

sigesceorp n. _ornament of victory_, #Gn# 136.

sigesîð (i^2) m. _successful expedition_, OET.

sigespêd ¶ f. _success_.

sigetâcen n. _emblem of victory, sign_.

sigetîber n. _sacrifice for victory_, #Ex# 402.

sigetorht _brilliant in victory_, #Sat# 240.

sigetûdor n. _dominating race_, #Gu# 838.

sigeðêod f. _victorious people_.

sigeðrêat m. _victorious troop_, #Cr# 844.

sigeðûf? m. _triumphal banner_, #Jud# 201.

sigew¯æpen n. _victorious weapon_, B 804.

sigewang ¶ m. _field of victory_.

sigewîf n. _victorious woman_, #Lcd# 1·384.

sigfæst = sigefæst

sigi- = sige-

sigil, sigl n. _fibula, buckle, brooch, gem_. [cp. sigle]

sigirian = sigrian

siglan (_AO_) = seglan

sigle I. n. _necklace, collar_. II. f. _rye, black spelt_, #Lcd# 48a.
[_L._ secale]

sigor (y) m. _victory, triumph_, Æ. [sige]

sigorbêacen n. _emblem of victory_, #El# 985.

sigorbeorht _triumphant_, #Cr# 10.

sigorcynn n. _victorious race_, #El# 755.

sigorêadig ¶ _victorious_.

sigorfæst _victorious_.

sigorfæstnes (siger-) f. _victory_, A 11·173.

sigorlêan ¶ n. _reward of victory_.

sigorlic _triumphal_, #Gl#.

sigorspêd ¶ f. _good fortune in war_.

sigortâcen n. _convincing sign_, #Gu# 1089.

sigortîfer n. _offering for victory_, #Jul# 255.

sigorweorc m. _deed of victory_, #Ex# 316.

sigorwuldor n. _glory of victory_, #Gu# 93.

sigrian _to be victorious, triumph over, vanquish_, Æ.

sigriend m. _victor_, DHy 38^3.

sigsonte f. _a plant_, #Lcd#.

sigðe = sîðe

sihsta = siexta

-siht, -sihte v. blôd-, ût-s.  [[under "blôdsihte"]]

sîhte _marshy_?

+sîhte = +sýhte pret. 3 sg. of +sýcan.

sihtre = seohtre  [[under "seohter"]]

sihð I. f. _thing seen, vision_, _JnL, MkL_. ['_sight_'] II. pres. 3 sg.
of sêon.

sîhð pres. 3 sg. of sîgan.

+sihð, +siht (ie, y) f. _faculty or act of sight_, _Æ, Bo, Mk_; CP:
_aspect_: _what is seen, vision, apparition_. ['_i-sight_']

+sihðe (#BPs# 53^6) = +sehðe

+sihðnes £. _vision_, MtL p7^7.

silcen = seolcen

silf = self

silfor = seolfor

silfren = seolfren

Sîlhearwa (Æ) = Sigelhearwa

sillan = sellan

silofr = seolfor

sîma I. m. _band, chain_, #Gen# 765. II. = sêma

simbel (on) adv. _always, continually_, AO. [cp. simbles]

simbelfarende _roving, nomadic_, AO 26^16.

simbelgefêra m. _constant companion_, #Met# 11^50 (y).

simble (e, y) adv. _ever, for ever, always, constantly, continually,
continuously_. oftost s. _continually_.

simbles adv. _ever, always_.

simblian (y) _to frequent_, DR 15^10.

simb-lunga, -linga (siml-) _continually, constantly_, DR.

simel = (1) simbel adv.; (2) symbel

simeringwyrt = symeringwyrt

siml = simbel

siml- = simbl-

sîn I. (ý) refl. possess, pron. _his, her, its, their_. II. = sîen. III.
plur. pres. subj. of wesan.

sin- (y) prefix, _perpetual, permanent, lasting, infinite, immense_.

sinað- = seonoð-

sinbyrnende _ever burning_, #Met# 8^52.

sinc (y) ¶ n. _treasure, riches, gold, valuables, jewel_.

sincald _perpetually cold_, #Ex# 472.

sincaldu f. _perpetual cold_, #Ph# 17.

±sincan^3 _to 'sink,' become submerged_, _MtR_: _digest easily, act as
aperient_? _Lcd_ 81b.

sincbrytta m. _distributor of treasure, prince_, A 3·71^17.

sincfæt ¶ n. _precious vessel_.

sincfâg ¶ _richly adorned_.

sincgestrêon ¶ n. _treasure, jewel_.

sincgewæge § n. _abundance of treasure_.

sinc-giefa, -gifa ¶ m. _giver of treasure, ruler, chief, lord, king_.

sincgifu f. _gift of treasure_, #An# 1511.

sincgim ¶ m. _valuable gem, jewel_.

sincgyfa = sincgiefa

sinchroden ¶ ptc. _adorned with costly ornaments_.

sincmâððum m. _treasure_, B 2193.

sincstân m. _precious stone_, #Met# 21^21.

sincðego ¶ f. _receipt of treasure_. [ðicgan]

sincweorðung ¶ f. _costly gift_.

sind plur. pres. indic. of wesan.

sinder (y) n. _'cinder,' dross, scoria, slag_, _Cp, WW_; CP.

sinder- = sundor-

sinderlîce = synderlîce

sinderôm m. _rust_, WW 402^41.

sindon plur. pres. indic. of wesan.

sindor = sinder

sindrêam ¶ m. _everlasting joy_.

sindrig (Æ) = syndrig

+sîne = +sîene

sineht _sinewy_, #Lcd# 91a. [seono]

sine-wealt, -weald, -wælt (eo, y) _round, globular, concave_, Æ:
_circular, cylindrical_. [sin-]

sinewealtian _to be unsteady_, WW 515^31.

sinewealtnes f. _roundness, globularity_.

sinewind _artery_, WW 352^25. [seonu]  [[under "seono"]]

sinfrêa m. _husband_, B 1934.

sinfulle f. _houseleek_, #Lcd#, WW.

singal _perpetual, everlasting_, Æ, CP: _continuous, constant_, Æ:
_daily_.

singala, singale, singales adv. _always, ever, continually_.

singalflôwende ptc. _ever-flowing_, WW 177^36.

+singalian (y) _to continue_, #ACPs# 88^51.

singallic _incessant, continual_, CP 61^21. adv. (±) -lîce.

+singallician _to continue_, #JPs# 88^51.

singalnes f. _perseverance, assiduity_, OEG.

singalrene m. _constant flow_, #HGl#. [ryne]

±singan^3 (y) _to 'sing,' celebrate in song_, _BH, Bl, MtL, VPs_; AO,
CP: _crow, sing (of birds_), _Æ, Ph_: _chant, intone_, _OET, RB_: _read,
recite, narrate_, _Bl, Bo, VPs_: (_of things) sound, resound, ring,
clank_, _B, CP, W_.

+singe (= +sinie?) f. _wife_, #Jul# 54. [cp. sinig]

singendlic _that may be sung_, #LVPs# 118^54.

singere = sangere

singestre = sangestre

singian (Æ) = syngian

singrêne (y) I. f. _house-leek, periwinkle_, _Lcd_. ['_sengreen_'] II.
adj. _ever green_: _uncooked (of vegetables)_.

singrim adj. _exceeding fierce_, #Jul# 230.

sinhere m. _huge army_, B 2936.

sinhîg- = sinhîw-

±sin-hîwan, -hîgan npl. _wedded couple_, Æ, CP.

sinhîwscipe m. _permanent tie (marriage)_, #Bo# 50^1.

sinhwurf- = sinhwyrf-

sinhwyrfel _round_.

sinhwyrfende ptc. _round_, OEG 114.

+sinig _marriage_, DR 108^7.

+sinigan, sinigian _to marry_, NG.

+sinigscipe = sinscipe

+sinlîce (y) adv. _often_, RB 97^14.

sinn = synn

sinnan^3 ¶ (w. g.) _to meditate upon, think of, care about_: _cease_?
[_Ger._ sinnen]

sinnig = synnig

sinniht ¶ (y^1, ea^2) f. _eternal night_. adv. -nihtes _in continual
night, night after night_.

sinnîð m. _perpetual misery_, #Rim# 52.

sinop = senep

sinoð (e, eo, y) f. _synod, council, meeting, assembly_. [_L._ synodus]

sinoðbôc (e, eo, y) f. _record of the decrees of a synod, canon law_, LL
46[49,8].

sinoðdôm (eo) m. _decree of a synod_, #El# 552.

sinoðgewrit n. _records of a synod_.

sinoðlic _synodical_, BH.

sinoðstôw f. _meeting-place, place where a synod is held_.

sinowalt = sinewealt

sinr¯æden f. _(continuing state), marriage_, CP.

±sinscipe (e, y) m. _cohabitation, marriage_, Æ, CP: (+) _married
couple_, CP.

+sinsciplic _conjugal_, LL (440^6).

+sinscippend _married_, GD 218^4.

sinsn¯æd f. _large piece_, B 743.

sinsorg f. _perpetual grief_, #Wif# 45.

sint = sind plur. pres. indic. of wesan.

sin-trendende (OEG), -tredende ptc. _round_.

sintryndel (y^1, æ^2) adj. _circular, globular_.

sinðyrstende ptc. (w. g.) _ever thirsting_, AO 130^31.

sinu = seono

sinuwealt, sinwealt = sinewealt

sinwr¯ænnes (y) f. _constant lechery_, WW 113^22.

sîo = sêo

siodo = sidu

siofa = sefa

siol- = seol-, sel-

sion _'laber,' a marsh plant_? _Lcd_ 1·254. ['_sion_']

sipian = sypian

sîpian _to sink low, wane, decline_, #Lcd# 3·151 (v. A 31·538).

sîre = sîgere

sirew-, sirw- = searw-, sierw-

sisemûs f. _dormouse_, WW.

sîst = sîhst pres. 2 sg. of sêon I.

sit pres. 3 sg. of sittan.

sitl = setl

sittan^5 _to 'sit,' sit down, recline_, _Æ, B, Bo, Bl, Chr_; AO, CP:
_remain, continue, be situated_, _Bo, Bl, Gen, LL_: (±) _settle, encamp,
dwell, abide, reside_, _Chr, LkL_; AO: _lie in wait, besiege, invest_,
_Chr, Met, VPs_: _preside over_, _Æ, MtL_; CP: _perch, roost_, _Gen,
Ph_: (+) _sit out, finish_. on cnêowum s. _kneel_. wið earm +s. _lean_.
on s. (1) _assail, attack_; (2) _press on, weigh down_.

sîð (ý) I. m. _going, motion, journey, errand_, _B, Bl, Lcd_:
_departure, death_: _expedition, undertaking, enterprise_: _road, way_:
_time, turn, occasion_, _Æ, G, Lcd, VPs_; AO. on ânne s. _at one and the
same time_, _Bo, Lcd_. ôðre sîðe...ôðre sîðe _on one occasion...on
another_: _conduct, way of life, manner_, Æ: _fate, destiny,
experience_, _Æ, B, Chr_. ['_sithe_'] II. adv. _late, afterwards_. comp.
sîð, sîðor _later_. ¯ær and s. _always_. ne ¯ær ne s. _never_. ¯ær
oððe s. _ever_: a comp. adj. sîðra _late, later_, and a superl.
sîð(e)mest, sîðest _latest, last_ are formed from sîð. æt sîðestan
_at last, finally_. III. prep. and conj. _after_. s. ðam _after,
afterwards_. [_Ger._ seit] IV. (±) = ±sihð pres. 3 sg. of sêon I.

+sîð I. m. (rare ds. +sîðan) (¶) _comrade, companion_: (¶) _follower,
retainer, warrior_: _count, thane_. II. n. _company_, v. LL 2·427; 446.

sîðberend m. _reaper_, WW 235^3. [sîðe]

sîðbôc f. _itinerary_, OEG 2023.

sîðboda m. _herald of departure (the pillar of cloud)_, #Ex# 250.

sîðboren ptc. _late-born_, #VPs#, WW.

+sîðcund _fit to rank as a thane_.

+sîðcundlic _intimate_, BH 120^33 (v.l.).

sîðdagas mpl. _later times_, #El# 639.

sîðe m. '_scythe_,' _Æ, Cp_.

sîðemest, sîðest v. sîð II.

sîðfæt (Æ, CP), sîðfat mn. _way, journey, voyage, expedition_: _path,
road, course_, Æ: _experience, conduct_: _period of time_.

sîðfrom ¶ _ready for a journey_.

sîðgêomor _travel-weary_, #Ap# 1.

sîðian _to go, depart, travel, wander_, _Æ, B_. ['_sithe_']

+sîðlic = +sîðcundlic

sîðlîce adv. _lately, after a time_, Æ.

+sîðmægen ¶ n. _band of warriors_.

+sîðmann = +sîð

sîðmest, sîðor, sîðra v. sîð II.

+sîðr¯æden f. _troop_, WW 206^21.

+sîðscipe m. _fellowship, society_, BH.

sîðstapel _step, track_, #LPs# 16^5.

sîðð = sîð

siðða adv. and conj. _afterwards_, _JnL, LkL_; #Met#. ['_sith_']

siððan, siððon (co, y) I. adv. _since, afterwards, from now on,
hereafter, further, then, thereupon, after, later_, _Æ, Bl_. II. conj.
_as soon as, when, since, after that, inasmuch as_, _Bl, Bo_. III. prep.
(w. a.) (LWS) _after_. ['_sithen_'; sîð, ðam]

sîðweg (#Gu# 859) = sîdweg

sîðwerod n. _travelling troop_, #Gen# 2114.

±sîðwîf n. _noble lady_.

sîwan = sîwian

siwen pp. of sêon II.

siwen-îge, -igge, -êge _blear-eyed_, CP.

±sîwian (êo, ý) _to sew, mend, patch_: _knit together, unite_.

six = siex

six-; v. also siex-.

sixecge _six-sided, hexagonal_, WW.

sixfête (y) adj. _of six (poetical) feet_.

sixgylde _entitled to sixfold compensation_, LL 3[1].

sixhynde _belonging to the class whose_ 'wergeld' _was 600
shillings_, LL.

sixhyrnede _having six angles_, WW 179^13 (e^2).

sixnihte _six days old_, #Lcd#.

sixteogoða '_sixtieth_,' _ÆGr_.

sixtêoða '_sixteenth_,' _MH_ (e^1), _ÆGr_ (y^2).

sixtig¯ære _60-oared ship_. [âr]

sixtigfeald _sixtyfold_.

sixtigwintre _sixty years old_, Æ.

sixtýne (y^1, e^2) '_sixteen_,' _MH_.

sixtýnenihte _sixteen days old_, #Lcd#.

sixtýnewintre _sixteen years old_.

slâ = slâh

slacful (= æ) _lazy_, #Gl, Lcd#.

slacian _to slack off, become remiss_, _Æ_. ['_slake_']

slâd pret. 3 sg. of slîdan.

sl¯æ == slêa

slæc _'slack,' remiss_, _CP_ 125^1 (v. A 39·366).

slæcan = slacian

+slæccan _to seize_, #VPs# 7^3.

sl¯æd (â, ê, êa) n. _valley, glade_, _AO_; Mdf. ['_slade_']

-sl¯æfan v. tô-s.

slæg- = sleg-

slæge m., slæget n. = slege

slægen pp. of slêan.

slægn¯æt = slegnêat

sl¯ægu (ê) f. _lethargy_, #Gl# (v. A 33·387).

slæht = slieht

slæhtan _to strike, slay_, NG. [_Ger._ schlachten]

+slæhte pret. 3 sg. of +sleccan.

slæhð = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slêan.

sl¯æp I. (â, ê, êa) m. '_sleep_,' _Æ, CP_: _sleepiness, inactivity_, _B,
CP_: _death_, _Cr_. II. m? _slippery place_? KC.

±sl¯æpan^7 (ê, â) pret. 3 sg. slêp, slêap; also wk. sl¯æpte, slêpte,
slêpde _to 'sleep,'_ _BH, Bl, VPs_; CP: _be benumbed, motionless,
inactive_, _Æ, CP, Lcd_: _lie with_, _Æ, LL_: _rest in the grave, die_,
_Æ_ (â), _Mt_.

sl¯æpb¯ære _soporific_, #Lcd# 1·284^22.

sl¯æpere m. _sleeper_, Æ.

sl¯æpern (â, ê) n. _dormitory_.

sl¯æplêas _sleepless_, GPH 399.

sl¯æplêast f. _sleeplessness_, Æ.

sl¯æpnes f. _sleepiness_, HL 14^106.

sl¯æpor _drowsy, sleepy_.

sl¯æpwêrig _weary and sleepy_, #Rd# 5^5.

sl¯æt = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slêan.

sl¯ætan _to bait (a boar)_, _Æ_. ['_sleat_']

sl¯æting f. _right of hunting_, #Chr# 1087.

sl¯æw = slâw

-sl¯æwan v. â-s.

sl¯æwð (ê) f. _sloth, indolence_, _Æ, Bo_; CP. ['_sleuth_'; slâw]

slâg = slâh

slaga m. _slayer, homicide_, Æ, CP.

slagen pp. of slêan.

slagu = slægu  [[headword spelled "sl¯ægu"]]

slâh, slâg f. _'sloe' (fruit of the blackthorn)_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_; Mdf.

slahe = slêa

slâhðorn m. _blackthorn_, _Cp, Lcd_; Mdf. ['_sloethorn_']

slâhðornragu f. _lichen from blackthorn_, #Lcd#.

slâhðornrind f. _blackthorn bark_, #Lcd#.

slân I. (K, N) = slêan. II. gs. of slâ (slâh).

slanc pret. 3 sg. of slincan.

slâp == sl¯æp

slâpel = slâpol

slâpfulnes f. _lethargy_, WW 541^42?

slâpian _to become sleepy_, CP.

slâpol _somnolent, lethargic_.

slâpolnes f. _somnolence, lethargy_, Æ.

slâpornes f. _lethargy_, A 11·98.

slâpul = slâpol

slarege (i^2) f. _'clary' (plant)_, _Lcd, WW_.

slât pret. 3 sg. of slîtan.

slâw _'slow,' sluggish, torpid, lazy_, _Bo, CP, Mt_.

slâwerm (#KGl# 80^22) = slâwyrm

slâwian _to be slow, sluggish_, Æ.

slâwlîce adv. _'slowly,' sluggishly_, _CP_.

slâwyrm m. _'slow-worm,' snake_, _OEG, Sc, WW_.

slêa f. _slay, weaver's reed_, #Gl#. [slêan; cp. slege]

slêac (v. A 39·366) _'slack,' remiss, lax, sluggish, indolent, languid_,
_Æ, B, BH_; CP: _slow, gentle, easy_, _Æ_.

slêacian _to delay, retard, slacken, relax efforts_.

slêaclic _slow, languid, idle_. adv. -lîce.

slêacmôdnes f. _slackness, laziness_, MFH 173.

slêacnes (e) f. _slowness_, _A, Æ, Lcd_: _remissness, laziness_, _CP_.
['_slackness_']

slêacornes f. _laziness_, A 11·98^40.

sleaht = slieht

slêan^6 _to strike, beat, stamp, coin (money)_, _forge (weapons)_, _Æ,
B, Bl, Lcd, VPs_: _throw, cast_, _Bo, Da_: _sting (snake)_: _pitch
(tent)_, _Æ_: _strike across (country)_, _dash, break, rush, come
quickly_, Æ: _'slay,' kill_, _Æ, AO, CP_. wæl +s. _to slaughter_: _cast
into chains_: (+) _strike down_: _play (harp)_: (+) _gain by fighting,
win_.

slêap I. pret. 3 sg. of sl¯æpan. II. pret. 3 sg. of slûpan. III. = sl¯æp

slêaw = slâw

slêbescôh = slêfescôh

slec- = sleac-

+sleccan _to weaken, disable_, #Cr# 149. [sleac]
  [[headword spelled "slêac"]]

slecg f. _('sledge'-)hammer, mallet_, _Nar, WW_; Æ.

slecgettan _to beat, throb_, #Lcd# 82b.

slecgwyrhta m. _metal-worker_, ANS 100·254.

slêd = sl¯æd

slêf = slîefe

slêfan _to slip (clothes) on_, _Guth_.

+slêfed _furnished with sleeves_. ['_sleve_']

  [[Printed inline, as continuation of "slêfan" entry.]]

slêfescôh m. _slipper_, #Gl# (slêbe-).

slêflêas = slýflêas  [[redirected to "slîeflêas"]]

slege (æ) m. _beating, blow, stroke_, Æ: _slaying, slaughter, murder_,
Æ, AO, CP: _crash, impact, clap (of thunder)_: _destruction, defeat_,
AO: (_weaver's_) '_slay_,' _WW_ 188^5. [slêan]

slegebýtl m. _beetle, hammer_, #Lcd# 122b.

slegef¯æge _doomed to perish_, #Jud# 247.

slegel m. _plectrum_, WW 466^28.

slegen pp. of slêan.

sleghrýðer (slægr-) n. _cattle for slaughter_, NC 321.

slegnêat n. _cattle for slaughter_, TC 105^4.

slêgu = sl¯ægu

sleh = sleah imperat. of slêan.

sleht = slieht

slehð = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slêan.

slêow = slîw

slêp I. (M) = sl¯æp. II. pret. 3 sg. of sl¯æpan.

slêp- = sl¯æp-

slêpan = (1) sl¯æpan; (2) slýpan

sleð (#VPs#) = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slêan.

slêwð = sl¯æwð

slî (#Gl#) = slîw

slic (î?) n. _beater, mallet, hammer_, LL 455^15; WW 75^16.

-slîcod (ý) v. nîg-s.  [[under "nîgslýcod"]]

slîdan^1 _to 'slide,' glide, slip, fall, fall down_, _Guth_: _fail,
err_: _pass away, be transitory or unstable_, _MH, Lcd_.

sliddor = slidor

slide m. _sliding, slip, fall_, Æ, CP.

sliderian = slidrian

slidor I. _slippery_, _Ps, Run_. ['_slidder_'] II. n? _slippery
place_, WW.

slidornes f. _slippery place, slipperiness_, _Ps_. ['_slidderness_']

slidrian _to slip, slide_, _CP, PPs_. ['_sliddern_']

slîefe (î) f. '_sleeve_,' _LL_.

slîeflêas '_sleeveless_,' _RB_ (y), _WW_ (e).

slieht (æ, ea, e, i, y) m. _stroke, slaughter, murder, death_, _AO_ (i):
_animals for slaughter_: (+) ¶_battle_. ['_sleight_'; slêan]

sliehtswýn (y^1) n. _pig for killing_, LL.

sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slêan.

slîf, slîfe = slîefe

-slîfan v. tô-s.

slifer _slippery_, #HGl# 405.

sliht (_AO, Æ_) = slieht

-slihtes v. eorð-s.

slihð pres. 3 sg. of slêan.

slîm n. '_slime_,' _CPs, WW_.

slincan^3 _to slink, creep, crawl_.

slincend mn. _reptile_, Æ.

slingan^3 _to worm, twist oneself_. [_Ger._ schlingen]

slipa = slypa

slipeg, slipig _slimy_.

slipor _slippery, filthy_, _Sc_: _shifty_, _Æ_. ['_slipper_']

slipornes f. _filthiness_, _DHy_ 36^8. ['_slipperness_']

+slit n. _rending, biting_, Æ: _something to be torn or rent_:
_backbiting, calumny_.

±slîtan^1 _to slit, tear, split, shiver, rend to pieces, divide_: _bite,
sting, wound_, CP: _backbite_, CP. [_Ger._ schleissen]

slitcwealm m. _death by rending_, LL (166^24).

slite I. m. _slit, rent, tear, bite_. II. f? _cyclamen_.

sliten m. _schismatic, heretic_, MtL p8^9.

slîtendlic _gorging_, WW 437^5.

slîtere m. _gorger, glutton_, WW: _destroyer_, W 235^24.

+slitglîw n. _raillery_, WW 372^32.

slitnes f. _desolation, destruction, tearing up_.

slitol _biting, pungent_, GPH 394.

slîtung f. _tearing, biting_, Æ.

slîðan^1 _to injure, wound_, #GnE# 202.

slîðe ¶ I. adj. _savage, fierce, dire, cruel, hard, hurtful, perilous_.
II. adv. _savagely_.

slîðelic _graven_, #EPs# 105^19.

slîðen _cruel, hard, evil_.

slîðheard (e^2) _cruel, severe, savage_.

slîðnes f. _graven image_, #EPs# 105^36.

slîw m. _a fish, tench, mullet_, #Gl#.

slôg I. pret. 3 sg. of slêan. II. = slôh I.

slôh I. mfn., gs. slô(ge)s, slô; das. slô(h) _'slough,' mire_, _BH, W_.
II. pret. 3 sg. of slêan.

-slop v. ofer-s.

slopen pp. of slûpan.

slota m. _morsel_, #Sc# 153^12.

slûma m. _slumber_, _DD, Gu_. ['_sloom_']

slûmere m. _sleeper_, NC 322.

sluncon pret. pl. of slincan.

slûpan^2 _to slip, glide, move softly_.

slýf == slîef  [[variant of "slîefe"?]]

slyht == slieht

slyhð = sliehð pres. 3 sg. of slêan.

slypa m. _slime, paste, pulp_, _Lcd_. ['_slip_']

slýpan (ê) _to slip, put on or off_.

slýpescôh m. _slipper_, WW 277^29.

slyppe f. _paste_, #Lcd# 163a.

slypræsn n. ? '_ferna_,' WW 237^1. [ræsn]

slýpð pres. 3 sg. of slûpan.

±smacian _to coax, flatter, allure, seduce_, #HGl# 476; OEG 3005.

smæc m. _'smack,' taste_, _WW_: _scent, odour_, _WW_.

±smæccan _to taste_, _ÆGr_. ['_smatch_']

smæl I. (often smal- in obl. cases) sup. smalost, smælst '_small_,' _Bo,
Cp, Lcd_: _thin, slender, narrow_, _AO, OET_: _fine_, _BH, CP, Lcd, WW_.
II. v. hêafodsmæl.

smæle = smale

smæleðerm (A 13·323) = smælðearme

smæll m. _slap, smack_, _JnL_. ['_small_']

smælðearmas (y^2) mp. _small intestines_.

smælðearme n. _lower abdomen_, CP.

sm¯ær (sm¯ære?) m. _lip_, #Gl, Lcd#.

smære- = smeoru-

sm¯æte _pure, refined_, _Cp, MH_; Æ. ['_smeat_']

sm¯ætegold n. _pure gold_, WW.

sm¯ætegylden adj. _of pure gold_, WW.

smal- v. smæl.

smale _finely, into small pieces_, _Bo_: _softly (not loudly)_.
['_small_']

smalian _to become thin_, #Lcd# 2a (Harl.).

smalung f. _reducing (of flesh)_, #Lcd#.

smât pret. 3 sg. of smîtan.

smêac pret. 3 sg. of smêocan.

smêade pret. 3 sg. of smêagan.

smêag- v. smêah.

±smêagan, smêan (ê) _to think, think out, reflect, meditate on,
deliberate_, Æ, CP: _examine, penetrate, scrutinize, look closely into_,
Æ: _suppose_: _seek (opportunity)_.

smêagelegen (? v. OEG 4142n.) f. _syllogism_.

smêagendlic _meditative_, #ÆGr# 211^6.

smêagung = smêaung

smêah I. adj. (smêag- in obl. cases) _sagacious, acute, subtle_:
_penetrating_. II. pret. 3 sg. of smûgan.

+smêah n. _intrigue_, #Chr# 1094.

smêalic _searching, exhaustive, careful_, CP: _exquisite_. adv. -lîce
_closely, thoroughly, carefully, exhaustively, accurately_, Æ, CP.

smêalicnes f. _subtlety_, NC 322.

smêamettas mp. _delicacies_.

smêan = smêagan

smêang = smêaung

smearcian (e) _to smile_, _Bo_; Æ. ['_smirk_']

smeart _smarting, painful_, _W_ 295^10. ['_smart_']

smeartung (e) f. _tickling_, A 8·451.

smêað I. f. _meditation_, #SPs# 118^77. II. pres. 3 sg. of smêagan.

smêaðanclîce adv. _in detail_, A 8·309.

smêa-ðancol, -ðancollic _subtle_. adv. -lîce _exactly, thoroughly,
exhaustively, studiously_, Æ.

smêaðancolnes f. _exactness, strictness_, ÆH 2·80^34.

±smêaung (ê) f. _reflection, thought_, CP: _inquiry, search_:
_intention, effort_: _intrigue_.

smêawung = smêaung

smêawyrhta m. _skilled artisan_, A 9·263.

smêawyrm m. _intestinal worm_, #Lcd#.

smec == smæc

smêc == smîc

smedma (eo) m. _fine flour, pollen meal_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_smeddum_']

smedmen adj. _of fine flour_, #Sc# 154^1.

smêgan = smêagan

smêgawyrm = smêawyrm

smêh (ÆL 31^952) = smêah II.

smêhwrenc (= smêa-) m. _cunning device_, TC 339.

smelt I. (y) m. _sardine, 'smelt,'_ _Cp_. II. = smolt

smelting (i, y) f. _amber_, Æ.

smêocan^2 _to emit smoke_, _Æ, Lcd, WW_: _fumigate_, _Lcd_. ['_smeek_']

smeoduma = smedma

smêoh = smêah

smeolt = smolt

smeortan^3 _to 'smart,'_ _AO_ 36^30 (or? fýrsmeortende = _smarting like
fire_).

smeoru (e), smeoruw n. _ointment, fat, grease, lard, tallow, suet_.
[_Ger._ schmeer]

smeorumangestre (smere-) f. _butter-woman_, LL.

smeorusealf (e^1, a^2) f. _unguent_, #Lcd# 55b.

smeoruðearm (æ^1, e^1) m. _entrail_.

smeoruwig (smere-) _rich, fat_, #Lcd# 79a.

smeoruwyrt f. '_smearwort_,' _Cp, Lcd_.

smeoðian = smiðian

smer- = smear-, smeor-, smir-, smier-

smêr = sm¯ær

smera = smeoru

smere- = smeoru-

smerian _to laugh to scorn_, MtL 9^24.

smeringwyrt f. _name of a plant_, '_crispa, victoriola_,' WW 135^1. [cp.
smeoruwyrt]

smeruwan = smierwan

smerwung = smirung

smête- = sm¯æte-

±smêðan _to smooth, soften, polish_, _CP_: _appease, soothe_, CP.

smeðe (_RB_) = smiððe

smêðe _smooth, polished, soft_, _Lk_; Æ, AO, CP: _suave, agreeable_, CP:
_lenitive_. ['_smeeth_']

±smêðian _to smoothen_, _Lcd, OEG_: _become smooth_. ['_smeeth_']

smêðnes f. _smoothness, smooth place_, _Æ, WW_. ['_smeethness_']

smêung = smêaung

smîc (ê, ý) m. _vapour, smoke_, _Æ, AO, Bo, PPs, VHy_. ['_smeech_';
'_smitch_']

smîcan (ê) _to smoke, fumigate_. [smêocan]

smicer _beauteous, elegant, fair, tasteful_, _Cp, Shr, TC_.
['_smicker_'] adv. -ere, CP.

smicernes f. _smartness_, WW 416^31.

+smicerod _well-fashioned_, WW 406^21.

smicor = smicer

smidema = smedma

smîec = smîc

±smierwan (e, i, y) _to 'smear,' anoint, salve_, _Bl, G, VPs_ (smirian);
CP. [smeoru]

smilte = smylte

smilting = smelting

smirenes (e, y) f. _ointment, unguent_.

smirewan, smirian = smierwan

smiringele m. _anointing oil_, Æ.

smirung (e, y) f. _ointment, unguent_, _Lcd_: _unction_. [smeoru]

smirwan = smierwan

smîtan^1 _to daub, smear, soil, pollute, defile_, _Æ, Cp, Lcd_.
['_smite_']

smitte f? _smudge, smut, blot_, _OEG, RB_. ['_smit_']

±smittian _to befoul, pollute_, _WW_: _infect_, _OEG_. ['_smit_']

smið m. _handicraftsman_, _'smith,' blacksmith, armourer, carpenter_,
_Æ, B, Mt_.

smiðbylg m. _smith's bellows_, NC 322.

smiðcræft m. _manual art_, BH 442^16.

smiðcræftega m. _skilled workman_, #Gen# 1084.

smiðian (eo) _to forge, fabricate_, _Æ, OEG_. ['_smith_']

smiðlîce adv. _dexterously_, WW.

smiððe (smeðe) f. _smithy, forge_, _Æ, BH_. ['_smithe_']

smoc m. _'smock,' shift_, _WW_.

smoca m. '_smoke_,' _LPs, Nar_ (cc).

smocen pp. of smêocan.

smocian _to emit 'smoke,'_ _Æ, LPs_: _fumigate_, _Lcd_.

-smogu v. ¯æ-s.

-smoh v. in-s.

smolt I. (e, eo) _mild, peaceful, still, gentle_, _MtL_. ['_smolt_'] II.
_lard, fat_, _CM, NC_. ['_smolt_']

smolte = smylte

smoltlîce adv. _gently_, ES 8·477.

smorian _to strangle, choke, suffocate_, _Cp, MtR_. ['_smore_']

smôð _'smooth,' serene, calm_, _Sc_.

smucon pret. pl. of smêorcan.  [[error for "smêocan"?]]

smûgan^2 _to creep_, Æ. [_Ger._ schmiegen]

smûgendlic _creeping_, #LPs# 68^35.

smýc = smîc

smýcð pres. 3 sg. of smêocan.

smygel, smygels m. _retreat, burrow_, #Gl#.

smyllan _to crack (a whip)_, GPH 388.

smylt = smelt

+smyltan _to appease_, BH 386^12.

smylte I. _mild, tranquil, peaceable, calm_, CP: _cheerful, prosperous_.
II. adv. _softly_. [smolt]

smyltelic = smyltlic

smylting (Æ) = smelting

smyltlic _tranquil, serene_.

smyltnes f. _tranquillity, peace, quiet, silence_, CP: _gentleness,
smoothness, mildness, composure, placidity_, CP: _evening calm_.

smyr- = smier-, smir-

smyrels m. _ointment, unguent, unction_, _Æ, LL_. ['_smerles_'; smeoru]

smytta = smitta  [[headword spelled "smitte"]]

snâ = snâw

snaca m. _'snake,' serpent_, _Lk, W_.

snacc m. _a small vessel, war-ship_, _Chr_. ['_snack_'; _Dan._ snekke]

snâd = sn¯æd II.

-snæcce v. twi-s.

sn¯æd I. m. _handle of a scythe_, _ÆH_ 2·162. ['_snead_'] II. (â) m. _a
clearing in a wood_, Ct (Mdf). III. f. _piece, morsel, slice, portion of
food_, _Æ, Lcd_. ['_snede_'; snîdan]

sn¯ædan I. (ê) _to cut, slice, lop off, hew_, _Ln, CP, Mt_. ['_sned_';
snîðan] II. _to eat, take a meal_, #Chr# 1048.

sn¯ædel (#Gl#) = sn¯ædelðearm

sn¯ædelðearm m. _great gut_, #Gl, Lcd#.

sn¯æding f. _meal, snack_, CM, RBL.

sn¯ædinghûs n. _cook's shop_, WW 185^1.

sn¯ædingscêap n. _sheep for slaughter_, #PPs# 43^23.

sn¯ædm¯ælum adv. _bit by bit_, #Lcd# 127a.

snægl (e), snægel m. '_snail_,' _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

sn¯æl = snægl

sn¯æs = snâs

sn¯æsan (or? onsn¯æsan) _to run through, pierce, spit_, LL 69[36]. [snâs]

sn¯æðfeld m. _a defined tract of pasture or woodland_ (v. Mdf). [sn¯æd]

snâs (¯æ) f. _spit, skewer_, WW 237^17 and #n#.

snâð I. pret. 3 sg. of snîðan. II. (?) n? _killing_ (v. OEG 3070).

snâw m. '_snow_,' _Bl, Chr, Met, VPs_: _snowstorm_, _Bo_.

snâwceald _icy-cold_, #Met# 29^8.

snâwgebland n. _snow-storm_, AO 186^34.

snâwhwît _snow-white_, Æ.

snâwig '_snowy_,' _Lcd_.

snâwît = snâhwît  [[headword spelled "snâwhwît"]]

snâwlic _snowy_.

sneare, snearh f. '_snare_,' _OEG_.

snêdan = sn¯ædan

snêl, sneg(e)l = snægl

snell _smart, ready, rapid, keen, fresh, brisk, active, strong, bold_,
_An, B, Cr, Ph_; AO. ['_snell_']

snellic _smart, ready, quick, rapid, bold_. adv. -lîce, _Wy_.
['_snelly_']

snellscipe m. _quickness, boldness_, #Chr# 1057#d#.

snelnes f. _agility_, #ApT# 13^7.

snêome ¶ adv. _quickly, speedily, swiftly_: _immediately, at once_.

+sneorcan^3 (e) _to shrivel, dry up_, #VPs# 30^13.

snêowan^7 (ô) ¶ _to hasten, go_.

snêr f. _harpstring_. [cp. _Ger._ schnur]

+snerc pret. of sneorcan.

snîcan^1 _to sneak along, creep, crawl_, _CP, Lcd_. ['_snike_']

snid I. n. _slice_: (+) _slaughter_. [_Ger._ schnitt] II. m. _saw_, CP.

snide I. m. _incision_: _slaughter_. II. = snid II.

sniden pp., snidon pret. pl. of snîðan.

snidîsen n. _lancet_, #Lcd# 78a.

snirian = snyrian

snîte f. '_snipe_,' _Cp, WW_. ['_snite_']

±snîðan^1 _to cut, lance_, CP: _cut off, amputate_, _CP_: _hew down,
slay, kill_, _Æ_; CP: _mow, reap_. ['_snithe_'; _Ger._ schneiden]

snîðstrêo _carline thistle_? (BT) _chopped straw_? (JGPh 1·328), Cp
358#s#.

snîðung f. _incision, wound_: _slaughter_.

snîwan _to snow_, _BH, Cp, Nar_; Æ. ['_snew_']

snôca m. _nook_? _inlet_, BC 3·141´ (v. Mdf).

snôd f. _hood, head-dress, fillet_, Æ.

snoffa m. '_nausea_,' CM 50.

snofl _phlegm, mucus_, #Lcd# 9a.

snoflig _full of phlegm_, A 8·299.

snofol = snofl

snoru f. _daughter-in-law_, Æ, AO. [_Ger._ schnur]

+snot n. _mucus_, #Lcd# 20b.

snotor, snoter _clever, prudent, intelligent, discerning_, _MtL_; Æ, CP.
['_snoter_']

snotorlic (e^2) _philosophic, wise_. adv. -lîce.

snotornes f. _wisdom, prudence_, Æ.

snotorscipe m. _cleverness in argument, dialectics_, OEG 3215; 2^172.

-snotorung (e^2) v. word-s.  [[under "wordsnoterung"]]

snotorwyrde _wise of speech, plausible_, W 107^1.

snotter, snottor, snottra (wk.) = snotor

snôwan = snêowan

snûd I. adj. _quickly approaching_, #Cr# 842. II. n? _speed_, #An# 267.

snûde adv. _quickly, at once_.

snyflung f. _mucus from the nose_, _NC_ 322. ['_snivelling_']

snyrian ¶ _to hasten, hurry_.

snyring _sharp rock_, WW 371^22.

snýtan _to blow the nose_, _NC_ 322. ['_snite_']

snyteru = snyttru

snýting f. _blowing of nose_, _WW_ 162. ['_sniting_']

snytre _clever, wise_, #Gen# 2808.

snytrian _to be clever, wise_.

snytro, snytru == snyttru

±snyttru f. (often in pl.) _wisdom, cleverness, prudence, sagacity,
intelligence_, AO, CP.

snyttrucræft ¶ m. _wisdom, sagacity_.

snyttruhûs n. _house of wisdom_, #PPs# 77^60.

snyttrum adv. _cunningly_.

snyðian _to go nose or beak forwards (of a plough)_, #Rd# 22^6.

-snyðian, -snyððan v. be-s.

soc I. (±) n. _sucking_, _Æ_. ['_sock_'] II. m. _soakings_, Mdf.

sôc I. pret. 3 sg. of sacan. II. = sôcn

socc m. _'sock,' light shoe, slipper_, _Cp, RB_. [_L._ soccus]

socian '_to soak_,' _Lcd_. [sûcan]

sôcn f. _seeking, question, inquiry, case, cause_: _visit, resort_, _Æ,
W_: _attack_, _B_ 1777: _refuge, asylum, sanctuary_, Æ: _the exercise of
judicial power, jurisdiction, right of inquisition, right of taking
fines, revenue_ (v. sacu), _KC, LL_ (v. 2·454): _district in which a_
'socn' _was exercised_ (Eng. Hist. Rev. 27·20). ['_soken_']

sôcnes = sêcnes

+sod n. _cooking, boiling_, CP.

soden pp. of sêoðan.

sôfte I. (= sêfte) adj. _'soft,' mild, gentle_, _Æ_: _quiet, calm,
tranquil, undisturbed_, Æ: _luxurious_: _agreeable_, A 9·28. II. adv.
_Gen, Lcd, Met_.

sôftnes f. _ease, comfort_: _'softness,' luxury_, _Æ_.

sogeða (o^2) m. _hiccough, eructation_.

sôht pp., sôhte pret. 3 sg. of sêcan.

sol n. _mud, wet sand, wallowing-place, slough_, CP.

sôl n. _sun_, #PPs# 120^6.

solar = solor

sôlate f. _sunflower, heliotrope_, #Lcd#.

sole f. _shoe, sandal_, WW 125^25. [_L._]

solere = solor

solian _to soil, become defiled_, _Rim_ 67. ['_sole_']

sôlmerca m. _sundial_, NC 350.

sôlmônað m. _February_.

solor m. _loft, upper room_, _CP, Ph_: _'palatium' hall, dwelling_, GD
248^14. ['_sollar_'; _L._ solarium]

solsece (æ^2) f. _heliotrope_. [_L._ solsequia]

som == sam

sôm- = sâm-

sôm f. _arbitration, agreement, reconciliation_, _Æ, LL_. ['_some_']

+sôm _unanimous, peaceable, friendly_, Æ.

somn- = samn-

somod == samod

sômr¯æden f. _wedlock_, CP 19^18.

somw- = samw-

sôn m. _sound, music_, CP. [_L._ sonus]

sôna adv. _directly, forthwith, immediately, at once_, _Bl, Chr, CP,
MtL, Sat_. s. swâ _as 'soon' as, when_, _Bl, CP_.

sonc = sanc pret. of sincan.

sôncræft m. _music_, A 13·38^306.

sond == sand

song I. = sang pret. 3 sg. of singan. II. sb. _bed_, NG. [_ON._ sæng]
III. _grape_, EHy 6^32.

sonwald (NG) = sinewealt

sopa m. '_sup_,' _Lcd_. ['_sope_']

sopcuppe f. _sop-cup_, Ct.

sopp '_offula_,' '_sop_,' _OEG_ 61^10.

soppian _to soak, 'sop,'_ _Lcd_ 86a.

sore _mote_, MtL 7^3.

sorg f. (occl. gs. in -es) _'sorrow,' pain, grief, trouble, care,
distress, anxiety_, _B, Bl, Bo_; CP.

sorgbyrðen f. _load of sorrow_, #An# 1534.

sorgcearig ¶ _anxious, sorrowful_.

sorgcearu f. _sorrow, anxiety_, #Gu# 939.

sorgful _'sorrowful,' sad, anxious, careful_, _Æ, B_; CP: _distressing,
doleful_, _B, Ph_.

sorgian (pres. ptc. sorgende) _to 'sorrow,' care, grieve, be sorry for,
be anxious about_, _B, Bl, Bo_; CP.

sorglêas _free from sorrow or care_.

sorglêast (h) f. _security_, #Lcd#.

sorglêoð ¶ (h) _dirge_.

sorglic _wretched, miserable_. adv. -lîce. ['_sorrowly_']

sorglufu f. _sad love_, #Deor# 16.

sorgstafas, mp. _anxiety, care_, #Jul# 660.

sorgung f. '_sorrowing_,' #w# 114^4.

sorgwîte (h) n. _grievous torment_, W 187^2.

sorgword (h) m. _lamentation_, #Gen# 789.

sorgwylm (æ^2) ¶ m. _wave of sorrow_.

sorh == sorg

sorig _sorry_, CP 227^8.

sot = sott

sôt n. (_what settles down_), '_soot_,' _Cp, Lcd_.

sotel, sotl, sotol = setl

+sotig _dirty, grimy_.

sotman m. _foolish man_, NC 350.

sotscipe m. _dulness, folly_, WW 171^33. ['_sotship_']

sott I. adj. _foolish, dull, stupid_. II. m. _dullard, fool_, _A_. open
sott _downright fool_, _Æ_. ['_sot_']

sôð I. n. _truth, justice, righteousness, rectitude_, _B, CP, Cr, Sol_:
_reality, certainty_. tô sôðe, tô sôðum _in truth, truly, truthfully,
accurately_. tô sôðan, ðurh sôð _verily, in truth_. II. adj. _true,
genuine, real_, _Bo, Bl_; AO, CP: _just, righteous_. ['_sooth_'] III. ==
_L._ pro- in compounds, in DR and NG.

sôðbora m. _soothsayer, astrologer_, #Chr# 975#a# (reading doubtful).

sôð-cwed, -cweden _veracious_, NG.

sôðcwide m. _true speech, truth, just saying_: _proverb_, NG.

Sôðcyning ¶ m. _King of truth, God_.

sôðe adv. _truly, really, accurately, rightly_, _B, PPs_. ['_sooth_']

sôðes adv. _verily_, _Mt_. [v. '_sooth_']

Sôðfæder m. _Father of truth, God_, #Cr# 103.

sôðfæst (e^2) _true, trustworthy, honest_, _Bl, Chr, Cr, VPs_: _just,
righteous_, _JnL, PPs_. ['_soothfast_']

±sôðfæstian _to justify_, NG.

sôðfæstlic (e) _true, sincere_, #An# 876. adv. -lîce _truly, honestly_,
OET 452. ['_soothfastly_']

sôðfæstnes f. _truth, truthfulness, fairness, fidelity_, _Bl, Bo, CP,
VPs_: _justice_. ['_soothfastness_']

sôðfest == sôðfæst

sôðfylgan '_prosequi_,' DR 29^18.

sôðgid (ie^2) ¶ n. _true report_.

sôðhweðere conj. _nevertheless_, NG.

±sôðian _to prove true, bear witness to_, _LL, NG_. ['_soothe_';
'_i-sothe_']

sôðlic adj. _true, truthful, real, genuine, right_, _Bo_. -lîce adv.
_truly, indeed, really, certainly_, _Bl, El, VPs_. conj. _for, now,
then, but_, CP. ['_soothly_']

sôðsagol _truthful_.

sôðsagu f. _truth_, _W_: _true story_, _MtL_. ['_soothsaw_']

sôðsecgan _to speak the truth_.

sôðsecgendlîce _truly, genuinely_, GD 185^17.

sôðsegen f. _true statement_, Æ.

sôðsp¯æce _truthful_, W 72^16#e#.

sôðspell n. _true story, history_, MtL p7^2.

sôðspr¯æc f. _true saying_, DR 171^18.

sôðtâcen n. _prodigy_, DR 43^16.

soðða (_JnL, LkL_) = siðða

sôðword ¶ n. _true word_.

spâca m. _'spoke' (of wheel, etc.)_, _Bo, WW_.

spade = spadu

spâdl = spâtl

spadu (æ) f. '_spade_,' _Æ_. [_L._ spatha]

spæc I. pret. 3 sg. of specan. II. mn? _small branch, tendril_, WW.

sp¯æc = spr¯æc

sp¯æclêas '_speechless_,' _GPH_ 398^72.

spænð pres. 3 sg. of spanan.

spær _sparing_, #Sc# 52^6.

spær- = spear-

spæren adj. _of plaster_, #Gl#.

spærhende (y^2) _sparing_, #ÆGr#.

spærian (N) = sparian

spærlic (e) adj. _sparing_. adv. -lîce.

spærlîra (e, ea, eo) m. _calf of leg_, Æ (ea). ['_sparlire_']

spærlîred _with a thick calf_, WW 161^27.

spærnes f. _frugality, nearness_.

spærstân m. _gypsum, chalk_, _WW_. ['_spar-stone_']

sp¯ætan _to 'spit,' spew_, _Mk, Jn_; Æ, CP.

sp¯ætl = spâtl

sp¯ætlan, sp¯ætlian _to spit, foam at the mouth_.

sp¯ætung f. _spitting_, #Lcd# 65a.

spala m. _substitute_, LL 484[2,1].

spâld (_El_) = spâtl. ['_spold_']

spaldur _balsam_, #Gl# (v. ES 37·186).

span = spann

+span n. _persuasion, allurement_, CP.

±spanan^7 _to draw on, allure, seduce, mislead, persuade, instigate_, Æ,
AO, CP.

span-e, -u, pl. -a, -an f. _teat_.

spanere (o) m. _seducer, enticer_, WW.

±spang fn. _clasp, buckle_. [_Ger._ spange]

spann I. f. _'span' (measure)_, _BH, WW_. II. pret. 3 sg. of spinnan.

+spann n. _fastening, band, buckle_, CP.

±spannan^7 _to join, link, clasp, fasten, attach_, CP.

spannung f. _span_, WW.

-spanung (i^2) v. for-, lêas-s.  [[headword spelled "lêassponung"]]

sparcian = spearcian

±sparian _to 'spare,' be indulgent or merciful to, save_, _BH, CP, VPs_:
_use sparingly, not to use_, _Æ_: _forbear, abstain from_, _Æ_.

+sparrian _to shut, bar_, MtL 6^6.

sparwa = spearwa

spâtl (¯æ) n. _spittle, saliva_, _CP, Lcd, NG_. ['_spattle_']

spâtlian _to spit out_, _WW_ 162. ['_spattle_']

spâtlung f. _what is spit out, spittle_, _WW_ 162. ['_spattling_']

spâðl = spâtl

spâw pret. 3 sg. of spîwan.

speaft (MkL 8^23) = speoft

speara = spearwa

spearca (æ, e) m. '_spark_,' _Bo, BH_; CP.

spearcian _to throw out sparks, sparkle_, #Sat# 78? (v. OEG 4029).

spearewa = spearwa

spearhafoc m. _sparrow-hawk_, _WW_. ['_spar-hawk_']

spearlîr- = spærlîr-

spearn pret. 3 sg. of spurnan.

spearnes = spærnes

spearnlian _to spurn, kick, sprawl_, Æ.

spearwa I. m. '_sparrow_,' _BH, Chr, Cp, VPs_. II. m. _calf (of the
leg)_, #Gl#.

spec = spic

spêc = sp¯æc, spr¯æc

specan = sprecan

specca m. _'speck,' spot_, _Cp, Lcd, WW_.

specfâh _spotted, blotched_, Cp 22.

sped _'glaucoma,' sticky moisture, phlegm_, _Cp, OEG_. ['_spade_']

spêd f. _luck, success, prosperity_, _El, PPs_: _riches, wealth,
abundance_, _Cr, Gen_; AO: _opportunity, power, faculty_, _Bl_. ¶_Ps_:
(only in dp. spêdum) _'speed,' quickness_, _Gen_. on s. _fluently,
skilfully_: _offspring_? #PPs# 103^16. [spôwan]

±spêdan w. d. _to prosper, succeed_, _Ma_. ['_speed_']

spêddropa m. _useful drop (ink)_, #Rd# 27^8.

spediende _suffering from_ 'sped,' WW.

spêdig _lucky, prosperous, rich_, AO: _plenteous, abundant_: _powerful_.

+spêdiglîce adv. _prosperously_, #LPs# 44^5.

spêdignes f. _opulence_, OEG 3605.

spêdlîce adv. _effectually, effectively_, #PPs#.

+spêdsumian _to prosper_, OEG 3630.

spêdum v. sped.

spel == spell

spelc m? _splint_, _Lcd_. ['_spelk_']

spelcan _to fasten with splints_, _Lcd_. ['_spelk_']

speld n., nap. speld, speldru _ember, torch_, _OEG, WW_. ['_speld_']

+spelia m. _substitute, representation, deputy_.

spelian _to be substitute for, represent_, _Æ, RB_. ['_spele_']

speliend m. _substitute, representative_, Æ.

speling f. _deputyship_, RB 10^12.

spell n. _narrative, history, story, fable_, _Æ, B, Bo, Da_; AO, CP:
_speech, discourse, homily_, _B, Bo, Lcd_; CP: _message, news_:
_statement, observation_. ['_spell_' and v. Mdf]

spellbôc f. _book of sermons_, TC 430^21.

spellboda m. _messenger, ambassador, angel_: _speaker_: _prophet_.
[beodan]

spellcwide m. _historical narrative_, AO 100^12.

±spellian _to speak, discourse, talk_, _Bo, Lcd, LkL_; Æ: _announce,
relate, proclaim_, #Bl#: _conspire_, GD 106^1. ['_spell_']

spellung f. _speech, conversation, narrative, discourse_, Æ.

spelt I. m. _'spelt,' corn_, WW. [L.] II. _'planca,' board of a book_,
_WW_ 164. ['_spelt_']

spelter (#Lcd# 3·136) = spaldur

spên? m. _fibre_, WW 403^17.

-spendan v. â-, for-s.

spendung f. '_spending_', _ÆH_ 556^29.

spênn (= spêonn) pret. 3 sg. of spannan.

spennels m. _clasp_, WW 238^34.

spenst pres. 2 sg., spenð pres. 3 sg. of spanan.

speoft (MkR 8^23; MtL 27^30) redupl. pret. of *spatan? _to spit_.
[v. ES 38·28f.]

+speoftian _to spit upon_, LkL 18^32. [ES 38·34]

spêon pret. 3 sg. of spanan, spannan.

speoru (#Gl#) nap. of spere.

speorulîra = spærlîra

spêow pret. 3 sg. of spôwan.

spêow- = spîw-

sper- = spær-, spear-, spyr-

spere n., nap. spe(o)ru _'spear,' javelin, lance_, _Æ, AO, CP, Cp_:
_stitcking pain_, #Lcd# 175a.

sperebrôga m. _terror at spears_, #Rd# 18^4.

sperehand f. _male line (of descent)_, BC 3·340^19.

sperehealf f. _male line of descent_, TC 491^20.

sperelêas _without a (spear)-head_, WW 143^7.

sperenîð n. _battle_, #Gen# 2059.

speresceaft (æ^3) m. '_spear-shaft_', _GD_ 14^27.

sperewyrt (speru-) f. _'spearwort,' elecampane_, _Lcd, WW_.

+sperod _armed with a spear_.

spic n. _fat bacon_, Æ. [_Ger._ speck]

spîce f. spîca m. _aromatic herb, spice_? [_L._ species]

spichûs n. _larder_.

spîcing m. _spike, nail_, ANS 125^51.

spicmâse f. _titmouse_, WW 286^15.

spîdenwiht (i?) '_spider_,' _Lcd_ 167b.

spigettan _to spit_, Æ.

spilæg _'spilagius,' a kind of snake_, DR 125^15.

spilc == spelc

spild m. _annihilation, ruin_, CP.

spildan _to waste, ruin, destroy_.

spildsîð m. _destructive expedition_, #Ex# 153.

spilian _to sport, play_, _LL, W_. ['_spile_']

±spillan _to destroy, mutilate, kill_, _Lk, JnL_: _waste_, _DR_: (late)
_'spill' (blood)_.

spillere m. _parasite_, OEG 679.

spilling f. _waste_, #Chr# 999#e#.

spilð (GL) = spild

spind sb. fat, WW.

spindel = sprindel

spinel f. gs. spinle '_spindle_', _A, Cp_.

spinelhealf (nl) f. _female line (of descent)_, TC 491^21.

spinge = spynge

spinil, spinl == spinel

-spinn v. in-s.

spinnan^3 _to 'spin,'_ _Æ, Cp, Lcd, Mt_: _twist, writhe_, Æ.

spîr _spike, blade_, #Lcd# 99b.

spircend (y) _sputtering_, Æ: _sparkling_.

spircing (y) _sprinkling_.

spitel m. _small spade, dibble_, GD 201^20.

spittan _to dig in with a spud_, LL 454[10].

±spittan _to 'spit,'_ _LkR, MtR, MkL_.

spittian _to spit (for cooking)_.

spitu f. _'spit' (cooking)_, _Æ, HL_.

spîwan^1 _to spit, spit out_, _'spew,' vomit_, _Æ, Bl, Chr, CP_.

spîwdrenc (i^2) m. _liquid emetic_, #Lcd#.

spiwe m. _vomiting_, #Lcd# 22b.

spiwedrenc = spîwdrenc

spîwere m. _one who spews_, WW 108^4. ['_spewer_']

spiweða = spiwða

spiwian (io) _to spew, spit up_ (w. d.).

spiwol _emetic_, #Lcd#.

spiwða (eo) m. _vomiting, vomit_, Æ.

spiwung (eo) f. '_spewing_,' _WW_.

splâtan? _to split_, v. ES 49·156.

splin = spinl  [[under "spinil"]]

splott m. _spot, blot_: _patch (of land)_, Æ.

+splottod _spotted_, TC 537^33.

spôn I. m. _sliver, chip, shaving_, _BH, Cp, Lcd_. ['_spoon_'] II. pret.
3 sg. of spanan.

+spon = +span

spong = spang

sponge f. '_sponge_,' _Mt_.

sponn == spann

spor n. _spoor, track, trail, footprint_, CP: _trace, vestige_. [_Ger._
spur]

spor- = spur-

sporettan^1 _to kick_, CVHy 6^15.

sporettung (sport-) f. _kicking_, EHy 6^15.

spornettan _to spurn, kick_, WW.

sporning f. _stumbling-block_, #Sc# 134^5.

sporu m. _spur_.

sporwrecel? m. _what is tracked after being driven off_? (BT), TC
172^26.

±spôwan^7 _to succeed, thrive_, Æ, AO, CP: (impers.) _profit, avail,
help_, Æ.

spôwendlîce adv. _prosperously_.

spracen n. _berry-bearing alder_.

spræc I. n. _shoot, slip_, WW 44^29. II. pret. 3 sg. of sprecan.

spr¯æc (ê) f. _language_, _Æ, Bo, Mt_: _power of 'speech,'_ _Lcd, LL_:
_statement, narrative, fable, discourse, conversation_, _Æ, Bl, CP,
LPs_: _eloquence_, Æ: _report, rumour_, _Lk_: _decision, judgment_:
_charge, suit_, _CP, PPs, TC_: _point, question_: _place for speaking_,
NG (ê).

spræcan = sprecan

spr¯æccyn n. _mode of speech_, BH 486^1.

+spr¯æce _eloquent, affable_.

+spr¯æcelic _incapable of being used alone (of the inseparable
prepositions)_, #ÆGr#.

spr¯æcful _talkative_, #LPs# 139^12.

spr¯æchûs n. _senate-house, curia_: _auditorium_, _WW_; ÆL.
['_speech-house_']

spr¯æcon pret. pl. of sprecan.

spr¯ædan _to spread_: (+) _stretch forth, extend_.

spr¯ædung f. _propagation_, DR 109^2.

sprængan = sprengan

spranc == sprang

spranca m. _shoot, slip, branch_, _Gl_. ['_spronk_']

sprang pret. 3 sg. of springan.

sprangettan _to quiver_, MP 1·610; WW 473^2.

sprêawlian _to 'sprawl,' move convulsively_, _GPH_ 392^10.

+sprec n. _faculty of speech_: _talk, discussion_.

sprêc = spr¯æc

±spreca m. _spokesman, councillor_, Æ.

±sprecan^1 _to 'speak,' say, utter, make a speech_, _AO, B, Bo, CP, G,
etc._: _converse, converse with_, _B, Bl_: _declare, tell of_, _LPs_:
(+) _agree_, AO. sp. on _lay claim to_.

+sprecendlic (spec-) _that should be spoken_, #Sc# 123^2.

sprêcern n. _place for speaking_, NG. [spr¯æc, ærn]

sprecolnes (spec-) f. _loquacity_, #Sc# 170^15.

sprecul _talkative_, #SPs# 139^12.

sprengan (æ) (±) _to scatter, strew, sprinkle, sow_, _Æ, LL_. sp. on
_administer a clyster_: _spring, break, burst, split_. [causative of
springan; '_sprenge_']

sprêot m. _pole, pike, spear_, _Cp, TC, WW_. ['_sprit_']

spretting = sprytting

spreulian (OEG 50^34) = sprêawlian

spreut (#Gl#) = sprêot

spricð pres. 3 sg. of sprecan.

sprincel m. _basket-snare (for catching fish)_, WW (v. ES 43·322; FM
200).

sprind _vigorous, strong_, _OEG, Sol_. ['_sprind_'; springan]

sprindel m? _tenter-hook_, #Gl#.

-sprindlad v. â-s.

sprindlîce adv. _vigorously_, OEG 738.

spring m. _'spring,' source_, _BC_ (y): _sprinkling_: _ulcer_: _flux_.

±springan^3 _to jump, leap_, _'spring,' burst forth, rise_, _B, Bo, Ma_;
Æ: _spread, be diffused, grow_, _Æ, Bo, MtL_.

springd = sprind

springwyrt f. _caper-plant_, #Lcd#.

+sprintan _to emit, utter_, JnL p187^12.

spritting = sprytting

sprot n., sprota m. _sprout, twig_, _OEG, WW_: _peg_. ['_sprote_']

sprott m. _sprat_, _ÆL, NC_. ['_sprot_']

sprungen pp., sprungon pret. pl. of springan.

-sprûtan v. â-, geond-s.

sprycð pres. 3 sg. of sprecan.

spryng = spring

sprýtan = spryttan

sprytle f. _chip_, BH 204^56 (v.l.).

spryttan _to sprout, come forth, spring, germinate, yield fruit_, _BH,
Lcd_; Æ: _incite_. ['_sprit_']

sprytting (e, i) f. _shoot, sprout_.

spunnen pp., spunnon pret. pl. of spinnan.

spura m. _spur_, Æ.

-spure v. fôt-, hêl-s.

spurleðer n. _spur-strap_, WW 97^10.

±spurnan^3 (o) _to strike against, kick_, _'spurn,' reject_, _Æ, PPs_.

spurnere (o) m. _fuller_, #ÆGr# 35^2.

spurul (= *spurnul?) _given to kicking or trampling_? OET.

spylian v. â-s.

spynge (i), spyncge f. _sponge_, AO. [_L._ spongia]

spyrc- = spirc-

spyrd m. _'stadium,' race-course_, NG.

spyremann (e^1) m. _tracker_, TC 172.

±spyrian (i) _to make a track, go, pursue, travel, journey_, CP: _follow
out, inquire into, ask about, investigate_, _BH, Bo_. ['_speer_'; spor]

spyrigend m. _investigator, inquirer_.

spyriung = spyrung

spyrran (e; = ie) _to strike_, GPH.

spyrring f. _striking_, OEG.

spyrte (e, i) f. _wicker basket, eel-basket_. [_L._ sporta]

spyrung f. _asking, investigation_, OEG 5214.

staca m. _pin, 'stake,'_ _AO, Lcd_; Æ.

stacan (stagan) _to pierce with a stake, spit_ (or? _roast_, ES 40·242),
IM 124^71.

stacung f. _the piercing of an effigy by a_ 'staca' (_a method of injury
by witchcraft_), LL.

stæde- = stede-

stæf m., nap. stafas _'staff,' stick, rod_, _Æ, Bo, Cp, LPs, CP_:
_pastoral staff_: (often in pl.) _letter, character, writing_, _Æ, Bo,
WW_: _document_: (in pl.) _letters, literature, learning_.

stæfad = stafod

stæfcræft m. _grammar_, Æ: (in pl.) _learning_, BH.

stæfcræftig _lettered_, OEG.

stæfcyst f. _letters, learning from books_, Æ.

stæfgefêg n. _syllable_: _letters_, #LSPs# 70^15.

+stæfl¯æred _instructed, lettered_, #Lcd#.

stæfleahtor m. _grammatical fault_, OEG 5467.

stæfleornere m. _student_, OEG 3126.

stæflic _literary_: _literal_, _Æ_. ['_staffly_']

stæfliðere f. _sling, 'balista.'_

stæfn == stefn

stæfplega m. _literary game_, #Gl#.

stæfr¯æw f. _row of letters, line of writing_, ÆL 23b^767: _alphabet_, BH
484^27.

stæfsweord n. _'dolon,' lance_? _javelin_? _WW_. ['_staffsword_']

stæfwîs (e) _lettered, learned_, #Lcd#.

stæfwrîtere = stærwrîtere  [[headword spelled "st¯ærwrîtere"]]

stæg n. I. _'stay' (rope)_, _WW_ 288^24. II. _pool, pond_. [_L._
stagnum]

st¯ægel _steep_. [stîgan]

st¯æger f. _'stair,' staircase_, _Æ, WW_. [stîgan]

st¯ægl = st¯ægel

stæl I. n. _place, spot_. on stale _in place of, instead of_. on stale
bêon _stand in (good) stead, be a help to_, AO 232^23: _situation,
condition_. [_Ger._ stelle] II. pret. 3 sg. of stelan.

st¯æl = staðol

stæla = stela

±st¯ælan _to found, institute, carry on_. synne st. _to institute sin_,
i.e. _enter on a conflict_, #Men# 287: (w. d.) _put upon, impute to,
accuse of, charge with_: (¶)_avenge_. [= *stæðlian = staðolian]

stæle = stale ds. of stalu.

st¯ælg = st¯ægel

stælgiest m. _thievish stranger_, #Rd# 48^5.

stælherige m. _predatory army_, CP. [stelan]

stælhrân m. _decoy-reindeer_, AO 18^11.

stæll = steall

stællan (A) = stiellan

+stællan _to stall, stable_, MH 20^1.

st¯ælon pret. pl. of stelan.

stæltîhtle f. _charge of stealing_, LL.

stælðing n. _theft_, NC 323. [stelan]

st¯ælwierðe _serviceable_, _CP, Chr, Shr_. [staðol; '_stalworth_']

stælwyrt f. _water-starwort_, WW 299^5.

st¯æn- = st¯ænen-, stân-

st¯æna m. _pitcher, jug_, WW 415^18. [stân]

st¯ænan (±) _to stone_, Æ, CP: _adorn with precious stones_, #El# 151.
[stân]

stænc == stenc

st¯ænen _made of stone, stony_, Æ, AO, CP. [stân]

st¯æner _stony ground_, NG.

stæng = steng

st¯ænilic _stony_, #Lcd# 1·216^20.

st¯æning f. _stoning_, Æ.

stæpe (e) m. usu. nap. stapas (stæpan, #RPs# 139^5) _going, gait_,
_'step,' pace_, Æ, CP: _power of locomotion_: _step, stair_, Æ:
_pedestal_: _grade, degree_, Æ. in stæpe _instantly_.

stæpm¯ælum adv. _step by step, by degrees, gradually_, CP.

stæpp- = stepp-

stæpð pres. 3 sg. of steppan.

stær m., nap. staras _starling_, _Cp, MtL_. ['_stare_']

st¯ær (ê) n. _story, history, narrative_. [v. A 37·56]

stærblind _stone-blind_, _Cp_. ['_stareblind_']

stærcedferhð = stercedferhð

stæreblind (_Shr_) = stærblind

st¯ærleornere? m. _student of history_, v. OEG 4145n.

st¯ærlîce adv. _accurately_, OEG 2^310.

stærling m. '_starling_,' _ZDA_ 33·241^54.

stærn = stearn

st¯ærtractere m. _commentator, historian_, WW 207^1.

st¯ærwrîtere m. _historian_, AO.

stæð n. occl. gds. staðe, nap. staðas _shore, river-bank_, Æ, AO, CP.
['_staith_']

stæðfæst _firm, stable_, #Cr# 981.

stæðhlýpe I. (ê) _sloping, precipitous_. II. f. _a steep place_, GD
95^16.

stæðhlýplîce adv. _steeply_, #Bl# 207^20.

stæðswealwe f. _sand-martin_.

stæððan _to support_, #Rd# 4^74.

±stæððig _staid, serious_, Æ.

±stæððignes f. _staidness, seriousness_, Æ, CP.

stæðweall m. _barrier of the shore_, #Gen# 1376.

stæðwyrt f. _a plant_, #Lcd# 29a.

stafas nap. of stæf.

stafian _to dictate_, Æ.

stafod _striped_, Ep (e), Erf (æ).

stâg pret. 3 sg. of stîgan.

stagan = stacan?

stagga m. _stag_, LL 624[24]. [_ON._; v. '_stag_']

stâh pret. 3 sg. of stîgan.

+stal n. _plaint, accusation_, MF 163: _contention_, GD 329^15:
_opposition_, W 186^17.

stal = steall

+stala m. _accessory in theft_, LL 100[25,1].

stalað = staðol

stald = steald

stale v. stæl.

stâlern n. _court of law_, WW.

staleð- = staðol-

stalgong m. _stealthy going_, #Gu# 1113.

stalian _to go stealthily_, AO: (±) _steal_, Æ.

stâlian _to confirm, strengthen_. [= staðolian]

stall == steall

stalu I. (±) f. _stealing, robbery, theft_, _Bl, MtL_; Æ: _stolen
article_: _fine for stealing_. ['_stale_'] II. _'stale' (wood to which
harp-strings are fixed)_, _WW_ 203^33.

stalung f. _stealing, robbery_, AO.

stam (o) _stammering_, #Gl#.

stamerian (omr-) _to 'stammer,'_ _GPH, HL_.

stammetan _to stammer_, WW 447^30 (o).

stamor _stammering_, #Gl#.

stân m. (and n. in NG) _'stone,' rock_, Æ, CP; Mdf.

stânæx f. _stone-workers' axe_? WW.

stânbæð n. _vapour bath made by the help of heated stones on to which
water was poured_ (BT), #Lcd#.

stânbeorg m. _rocky elevation_.

stânberende _stony_, WW 427^36.

stânbill n. _tool for working stone_, WW 447^33.

stânboga ¶ m. _rocky arch_.

stânbrycg f. _stone bridge_.

stânbucca m. _mountain goat_, #ÆGr# 68^5.

stânburg f. _town or fort of stone_, #Gen#; Mdf.

stanc I. pret. 3 sg. of stincan. II. sb. _sprinkling_, WW.

stâncarr m. _rock_, DR 19^11.

stânceastel (i^2) m. _chestnut-tree_.

stânceosel (i^2, y^2) m. _sand_, OEG.

stân-clif n., nap. -clifu, -cleofu (B) _rock, cliff, crag_, GD.

stânclûd m. _rock_, Æ, CP.

stâncræftiga m. _clever stone-worker_.

stancrian _to sprinkle_, WW 162^46.

stâncropp m. _stone-crop (plant)_, #Lcd#.

stâncynn n. _kind of stone_, ZDA 34·233.

stâncysel = stânceosel

stân-cyst, -cysten _chestnut-tree_. [_L._ castanea]

stand (o) m. _delay_, _MkLR_ 6^35. [v. '_stand_']

±standan^6 (o) _to 'stand,' ('i-stand') occupy a place, stand firm_, _B,
Bl, VPs_; Æ, AO, CP: _remain, continue, abide_, _G_; AO, CP: _stand
good, be valid, be, exist, take place_, Æ, CP: _oppose, resist_: _stand
still, stop_, Æ: (¶) _appear, flash out_, _B_: _arise, come_, W: (¶) _be
present to, come upon (of fear)_. ne s. tô ahte _be of no account_, W
82n. s. on _consist_: (+) _stand up, keep one's feet_, _Bo_: (+)
_attack, assail_, ÆL: (+) _perform_.

stâneht = stânihte  [[headword spelled "stâniht"]]

stânex = stânæx

stân-fæt n., nap. -fatu _stone vessel_.

stânfâh ¶ _stone-paven_.

stânflôr m. _paving-stone, tessella_, OEG 14^3. [cp. flôrstân]

stang pret. 3 sg. of stingan.

stângaderung f. _stone wall_, #ERPs# 61^3.

stângeat n. _opening between rocks_, Ct.

stângefeall n. _heap of stones_, MH 212^21.

stângefôg n. _stone-laying_, #El# 1021.

stângella (i^2) m. _'staniel,' pelican_, _VPs, WW_.

stângetimbre n. _stone-work, masonry_, WW 441^6.

stângeweorc n. _art of building_: _stone-work, masonry_, Æ.

stân-gripe m., dp. -greopum _handful of stones_? #El# 824.

stânhege m. _stone fence, wall_, #LPs# 79^13.

stânhîfet = stânhýwet

stân-hlið ¶ n., nap. -hliðu, -hleoðu _rocky slope, cliff, rock_.

stânhof n. _stone building_, #Ruin# 39.

stânhol n. _hole in a rock_.

stânhricg m. _rocky ridge_, OEG 5465.

stânhýpe f. _stone-heap_, KC 3·431^9.

stânhýwet n. _stone quarry_.

stânig (æ) _stony, rocky_, AO.

stâniht (æ) I. adj. _stony, rocky_, AO. II. n. _stony ground_.

stânincel n. _little stone_, A 13·31^86.

stânlesung f. _building with loose stones_, WW 117^34. [lesan]

stânlîm m. _cement, mortar_, WW 205^9.

stânmerce m. _parsley_, WW.

stânrocc m. _high rock, obelisk_, #Gl#.

stânscalu f. _shale_, EC 306^18.

stânscræf n. _rocky cave_.

stânscylf m. _rugged rock_, #HGl# 449.

stânscylig _shaly, stony_. [sciell]

stânsticce n. _bit of stone_, WW 376^18.

stânstr¯æt f. _paved road_, TC 525^21.

stântorr m. _stone tower_: _crag, rock_, GD 12.

stânweall m. _stone wall_, Æ.

stânweg m. _paved road_, BC 1·417.

stânweorc n. _stone structure_, Æ.

stânwong m. _stony plain_, #Rd# 88^6.

stânwurma m. _mineral colour_, OEG 1061.

stânwurðung f. _worship of stones_, LL.

stânwyrht? f. _stone structure_, WW 341^10.

stânwyrhta m. _stone-mason_, #Gl#.

stapa m. _grasshopper, locust_, WW.

stapas v. stæpe.

stapel = stapol

stapela m. _post, stake_, LL 387[4,2].

stapen pp. of steppan.

stapol m., nap. stapolas, staplas _basis, trunk of a tree, post, prop,
support, stay, pillar, column_, _An, MtL, WW_: _threshold_? _B_ 926:
_market and court_, EC 466. ['_staple_'; v. Mdf]

stapolweg m. _staked-out road_? KC 5·281^23.

-stapplian v. under-s.

stapul = stapol

staras v. stær.

starc = stearc

stareblind = stærblind

±starian _to 'stare,' gaze_, _ÆL, B_.

stað- v. stæð.

staðel == staðol

staðol (ea^1, e^2, u^2) m. _base, foundation, support_, _BH, WW_; AO,
CP: _station, position, state, condition_, CP: _stability, security_:
_firmament, heavens_: _underside of a turf_, _Lcd_. ['_staddle_';
standan]

staðol¯æht f. _real estate_, #Rim# 22.

staðolfæst _fixed, firm, steadfast_, _Bo, MtL_. ['_stathelfast_']

staðolfæstlic _steadfast, firm_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

staðolfæstnes (ea) f. _stability_.

+staðol-fæstnian, -festian _to make firm, establish_.

staðolfæstnung f. _foundation_, #LPs# 136^7.

±staðolian (e^2) _to fix, establish_, _Bl_: _confirm, make steadfast_.
['_stathel_']

+staðoliend m. _founder_, #LPs# 47^2 (e^2).

staðolung f. _foundation, settlement_.

staðolwang ¶ m. _settling place_.

staðul = staðol

steaf- = stæf-

stealc ¶ _lofty, steep, precipitous_.

-stealcian v. be-s.

stealcung f. _act of going stealthily_, _Æ_. ['_stalking_']

steald pret. 3 sg. of stellan.

+steald ¶ n. _dwelling, habitation_.

stealdan^7 ¶ _to possess, own_.

steall (a) mn. _standing, place, position, state_, _WW_: _'stall' (for
cattle), stable_, _Cp_; Æ: _fishing ground_.

+steall ¶ n. _structure, frame_.

-stealla v. eaxl-, hand-, ofer-s.  [[error for "handgestealla"?]]

steallere (a) m. _marshal, constable_.

-steallian v. forð-s.

  [[Cross-referenced word could not be identified.]]

stêam (ê, îe) m. _'steam,' vapour, moisture, exhalation_, Æ: _steaming
fluid, blood_, #Rood# 62.

stêap I. _'steep,' precipitous, deep_: _high, lofty, prominent,
projecting_, Æ: _upright_? B 2566. II. (êo) m. _'stoup,' beaker,
flagon_.

stêap- = stêop-

stêapes adv. _high_.

stêaphêah _very high_, #Rd# 26^4.

stêapol m. _cairn_? Ct.

stearc (a) _stiff, rigid, obstinate_, _Æ, El_: _stern, severe, hard_,
_Æ_: _harsh, rough, strong, violent, impetuous_, _WW_. ['_stark_']

stearcferð _harsh, stern_, #Jul# 636.

stearcheard _excessive_, DD 200?

stearcheort ¶ _stout-hearted_.

stearcian _to stiffen, become hard_, _GPH_ 402^56. ['_stark_']

stearclîce adv. _stoutly, strongly, vigorously_, _Chr_ 1016#d#.
['_starkly_']

stearcmôd _stubborn_, NC 323.

stearn (æ, e) m. _sea-swallow_? _tern_?

stearra (DR) = steorra

steartlian _to kick, struggle_, _OEG_. ['_startle_']

stea-ðel, -ðul = staðol

steb = stybb

stebn (#Gl#) = stefn

stêda m. _stud-horse, stallion_, Æ: _entire camel_. ['_steed_']

stede m. _place, site, position, station_, _Æ, Bo, Ct, Lcd, RB_; CP;
Mdf: _firmness, steadfastness, fixity_, Æ: _strangury_. of s.
_immediately_. [standan; '_stead_']

stedefæst _'steadfast,' firm_, ÆL.

stedefæstnes (styd-) f. _constancy_, DR 50^2.

+stedegian _to stand still_, ÆL 31^242.

stedeheard ¶ _firm, strong_.

stedelêas _unsteady, unstable_, Æ.

stedewang ¶ m. _field, plain_.

stedewist f. _steadiness_, #HGl# 530^4.

+stêdhors n. _stud-horse, stallion_.

stedig _sterile_, Æ.

stedignes f. _sterility_, #ERSPs# 34^12.

stedinglîne f. _stay (ship's rope)_, WW.

stef- = stæf-, staf-

stefen = stefn I.

stefn (æ) I. f. _voice, sound_, Æ, CP. II. m. _message, summons, turn
(of military service)_, _time_. nîwan stefne _anew, again_: _a body of
men who take a turn at work, the English military force_? (BT), KC
5·121. III. m. _'stem,' trunk_: _foundation, root_: _prow or stern of a
vessel_. [stæf; _Ger._ stamm]

stefna ¶ (æ) m. _prow or stern of a ship_.

stefnan I. (±) _to institute, arrange, regulate_: _alternate_. II. (+)
_to provide with a fringe_, CM 288.

stefnbyrd f. _control_, #Creat# 45.

stefnelof n. '_vociferatio_,' #LPs# 26^6.

stefnian (w. d.) _to summon_: (+) _determine, settle_, MFH 162.

stela (æ, eo) m. _stalk_: _support_, Æ.

±stelan^4 _to 'steal,' rob_.

stêle (#Gl#) = stýle

stellan I. (y) _to place, put, set_, AO, CP. +stelled bêon mid _have an
attack of_, GD. [steall] II. = stiellan

stelmêle m. _handled vessel_, A 9·264^11.

stelscofl (eo^1) f. _shovel with (long) handle_? GPH 400^498.

stelð pres. 3 sg. of stelan.

stêm = stêam

stêm- = stîem-

steming = stemning

stemm¯ælum _alternately_, CM 280. [stefn II.]

stemn (CP) = stefn

stemnettan _to stand firm_, #Ma# 122.

stemning f. _border, hem_: _turn, shift_.

stempan _to pound_, #Lcd# 1·378^18.

stempingîsern n. _stamping-iron_, WW.

+sten (æ) n. _groaning_, #PPs# 30^11.

stenan _to groan_, #PPs# 37^9.

stênan = st¯ænan

stenc m. _odour, scent, fragrance_, Æ, CP: _stench, stink_, Æ, AO.
[stincan]

stencan _to scatter_: _afflict_? #PPs# 43^3.

stencb¯ære _stinking_, BH 48^17.

stencbrengende _odoriferous_, DR 77^19.

+stence (æ) _odoriferous_, #Lcd# 1·282^19.

stencfæt n., pl. -fatu _perfume-casket_, OEG 8^239.

±stencnes f. _odour_.

stenecian _to pant_, OEG 6^5. [stenan]

steng m. _stake, pole, bar, rod, staff, cudgel_, CP. [stingan; v. Mdf]

stent pres. 3 sg. of standan.

steol- = stel-

stêold pret. 3 sg. of stealdan.

stêop = stêap

stêopbearn n. _orphan_, Æ.

stêopcild (ê, êa) n. _orphan, unprotected one_.

stêopdohtor (ê) f. _step-daughter_, WW.

stêopfæder m. _step-father_, AO.

stêopmôdor f. _step-mother_, AO, CP.

stêopsunu m. _step-son_, AO.

stêor I. (ý) f. _steering, direction, guidance_, Æ: _rule, regulation_,
Æ: _restraint, discipline, correction_, Æ, CP: _penalty, fine,
punishment_, Æ, CP. II. m. _steer, bullock, young cow_, #Gl#.

stêora (îe, ý) m. _steersman, pilot, guider, director_, CP (stîora).

stêoran = stîeran

stêorbord n. '_starboard_,' _AO_.

stêorend (ý) m. _corrector, director, ruler_.

stêorere m. _steersman_, CP 431^31.

stêoresmann = steormann

steorfa m. _pestilence_: _carrion_.

steorfan^3 _to die_, _ÆH_. ['_starve_']

steorglêaw _clever at astronomy_, OEG.

stêorlêas _not under control or rule, wild, profligate, foolish_.

stêorlêaslic _unmanageable_, GD 289^10.

steormann m. _pilot, master of a ship_, Æ.

steornægl m. _handle of a helm_, WW 312^4?

steornede _having a bold forehead_? WW. [cp. _Ger._ stirn]

stêoroxa m. _steer_, WW 120^26.

steorra m. '_star_,' _Chr, Lcd, VPs_.

stêorrêðra m. _steersman, master of a ship_.

stêor-rôðer, -rôðor n. '_rudder_,' _Cp_; CP.

steorscêawere m. _astronomer, astrologer_, WW.

stêorsceofol f. _rudder_, WW.

stêorsetl n. _steersman's seat, after part of a ship_, Æ.

stêorsprec _reproof_, #RPs# 37^15.

stêorstefn m. _stern (of ship)_, WW 482^15.

steort (e) sm. _tail_, _Cp, Bo_: _spit of land, cape_: _plough-tail_.
['_start_']

stêor-weorð, -wierðe _blameworthy, reprehensible_, CP 194, 195^3.

steorwigle n. _astrology_, #Gl#.

steorwîglere m. _mathematician, astrologer_, OEG 55^8.

steorwiglung f. _astrology_, A 13·33^141.

stêp- = stêop-

stêpan ¶ I. (±) _to erect, raise_: _elevate, exalt, honour, adorn,
enrich_: (+) _help, support_. [stêap] II. (±) _to initiate,
consecrate_, WW.

stepe = stæpe

stepegong m. _stepping, going_? #Rim# 22.

stêpel = stîpel

±steppan^6 _to 'step,' go, advance_, Æ, CP (æ).

steppescôh (æ) m. _slipper_, WW.

stêr = st¯ær

stêran I. _to burn incense_: _fumigate_. [stôr] II. = stîeran

stercedferhð ¶ (æ) _stout of heart, determined, bold, brave_.

stêring f. _incense_, OEG 1512.

stermelda m. _informer_? _complainant_? LL 9[5]; v. 2·202.

stern = stearn

sterra (N) = steorra

stert = steort

sterung = styrung

stêða (WW) = stêda

stêup- (Ep) = stêop-

stî- = stig-

stic- = stycce-

sticâdl f. _pain in the side, stitch_, WW 112^22.

sticca m. _'stick,' pointer_: _spoon_.

sticce I. n. _sticky matter_. II. == stycce

sticcian = stician

±stice m. _sting, prick, puncture, stab_, CP: _stitch, pain in the
side_.

sticel I. m. _prick, goad, thorn_, CP. II. = sticol

sticels (Æ) = sticel

sticfodder n. _case for spoons_? _or twigs_? LL 455[17].

stician (y) (±) tr. _to 'stick,' prick, stab, transfix, goad, gouge
out_, AO, CP: _kill_: intr. _stick, inhere, be placed, lie, remain
fixed, be hampered_, Æ, CP.

sticm¯ælum (Æ) = styccem¯ælum

stic-ol, -ul _lofty, sharp, abrupt, steep_, Æ: _arduous, rough_:
_scaly_: _biting_, GPH 417.

sticolnes f. _height_, OEG 4437.

stict¯ænel m. _basket_, WW 403^2.

sticung f. _pricking, goading, stabbing_, AO.

sticwærc m. _stitch in the side_, WW 112^21.

sticwyrt f. _agrimony_, WW 136^21.

stîegan = stîgan

stiell ¶ m. _jump, leap, spring_, #Cr#.

±stiellan (æ, e, y) _to leap, rush_.

stîem = stêam

stîeman (ê, ý) _to emit vapour_, _'steam,' exhale_. [stêam]

stîeme (î) _fragrant_, #Lcd#.

stîeming (ê) f. _fragrance_, OEG.

stîep m. _downfall_? #Gen# 60?

-stîepan (ê, êa, êo, ý) v. â-s.  [[under "âstýpan"]]

stîera = stêora

±stîeran (êo, î, ý) _to 'steer,' guide, direct, govern, rule_, CP:
(w. d. or g.) _restrain, correct, reprove, punish_, AO, CP. [stêor]

-stierfan (æ, e, y) v. â-s.  [[under "âstærfan"]]

stiern- = styrn-

stîernes (ý) f. _discipline_, Æ.

stîf _rigid, 'stiff,'_ GPH 394. [_Ger._ steif]

stîfearh m. _little pig (kept in a sty)_, LL 449^7. [stig]

stîfian _to be or become rigid_, #ÆGr#.

stîfician (= *stýfecian) _to extirpate, root out_, #Lcd# 3·184^17.

stîfig _steep_, BC (Mdf).

stig n. _'sty,' pen_: _hall_.

stîg f. _narrow path, way, footpath, track, road, course, line_, CP.
[_Ger._ steig]

±stîgan^1 _to move, go_: _go up, spring up, ascend, rise, mount, scale_,
AO, CP: _go down, descend_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._ steigen]

stige m. _ascent, descent_.

stig-el (-ol) f. '_stile_,' Ct, GD 24.

stigelhamm m. _enclosure reached by a stile_, KC 5·289^2.

stîgend m. _stye (on the eye)_, WW 114^10.

stigian _to shut into a sty_.

stîgnes f. _descent_, LkL 19^37.

stigrâp m. '_stirrup_,' WW.

stigu = stig

stigweard = stîweard

stigwita = stîwita

stihl = stigel

stihtan (±) _to rule, direct, arrange, order, ordain_, AO, CP: _incite,
instigate_. [_Ger._ stiften]

stihtend m. _disposer_, #Jul# 419.

stihtere m. _director, ruler_, CP 391^22; GD 221^19.

stihtian (CP) = stihtan

±stihtung f. _arrangement, direction, dispensation, providence_, AO.

stîhð pres. 3 sg. of stîgan.

stileð = stylð pres. 3 sg. of stelan.

±stillan (y) _to be still_: (w. d. or a.) _'still,' ('i-still') quiet,
calm, appease, hush_, _BH, Gen_.

stille _'still,' quiet, calm, stable, fixed_: _gentle_, Æ, CP: _silent_,
Æ: _secret_.

stilles = stilnes

stillîce adv. _silently_, CM 266.

stilnes (AO, CP), stillnes f. _stillness, quiet, silence_: _peace_, AO,
CP: _release, relaxation_, CP.

stîme = stîeme

stincan^3 _to emit a smell_, _'stink,' exhale_, AO: _sniff_, B 2289:
_rise (of dust, vapour, etc.)_, #Rd# 30^12.

+stincan^3 tr. _to smell_, CP: _have the sense of smell_, _PPs_.
['_i-stink_']

sting (y) m. _'sting,' puncture, thrust_.

stingan^3 I. _to 'sting,' stab, pierce, push through, thrust_, CP. st.
on _lay claim to, usurp_. II. = stincan

stintan = styntan

stiorc = stirc

stîpel (ê, ý) m. _'steeple,' tower_, Æ. [stêap]

stîpere m. _post, prop_, WW 126^11.

+stîr = +stýr

stir- = styr-

stîran = stîeran

stîrâp = stigrâp

stirc (io, y) n. _calf_, Æ (y).

stirgan = styrian

stitian = stihtan

stîð _stiff, thick, rigid, hard, resolute, firm, strong, brave_, Æ:
_stubborn, unrelenting, austere, strict, fierce, harsh, cruel_, Æ, CP.

stîðe I. adv. _very much, strongly, well_: _harshly, strictly, severely,
bitterly_, Æ. II. f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 160b.

stîðecg _stiff-edged_, #Rd# 88^14.

stîðferhð ¶ _determined, stern_.

stîðhycgende ¶ (-hug-) _determined, resolute, brave_: _stern,
obstinate_.

stîðhýdig ¶ _determined, resolute_.

stîðhygd _determined, resolute_, #Jul# 654.

+stîðian _to become hard_: _become strong, grow up, mature_, Æ.

stîðlic _firm, stout, strong, hard_: _decided_: _harsh, stern, severe_,
Æ, CP. adv. -lîce.

stîðmægen n. _powerful force_, DD 114.

stîðmôd ¶ _resolute, brave, firm, unflinching, stubborn, stern, severe_.

stîðnes f. _hardness, rigidity, strictness, severity, rigour_, Æ:
_firmness, constancy_, Æ.

stîðweg m. _rough way_, #Rd# 4^35.

stîweard m. _'steward,' housekeeper, guardian_. [stig-]

stîwita m. _housekeeper_? _householder_? #Gen# 2079; #Rd# 4^10.

stoc I. m. _'stock,' stump, stake, log_, Æ; Mdf: _trumpet_, MtL 6^2.
[_Ger._ stock] II. n. _place, house, dwelling_, GD (v. ES 37·191).

stoccen _made of logs_? KC 3·73^20.

stoclîf n. _dwelling-place, city_.

stocweard m. _citizen_, OEG 5272.

stocwîc n. _dwelling-place_, GD 172^4.

stod mf. _post_, WW 106^33.

-stod v. wealh-s.  [[headword spelled "wealhstôd"]]

stôd I. n. _'stud' (of horses)_, Mdf. II. pret. 3 sg. of standan.

stôdfald m. _stud-fold, paddock_, Ct.

stôdhors n. _stud-horse, stallion_, BH 138^1.

stodla m. _(weaver's) slay_, LL 455[15,1].

stôdmyre (e^2) f. _brood-mare_, LL 58[16].

stôdon pret. pl. of standan.

stôdðêof m. _horse-stealer_, LL 54[9,2].

stofa, stofu mf. _bath-room_, #Gl#. ['_stove_']

stofbæð n. _vapour bath_.

stofn mf. _trunk, stem, branch, shoot_: _progeny_: _station, position_.

stôl I. m. _'stool,' chair, seat_, CP: _throne_: _bishop's see_. II. n.
_long outer garment_, NG.

stole f. _stole_. [_L._]

stolen pp. of stelan.

stom == stam

stonc = stanc pret. 3 sg. of stincan.

stond == stand

stôp pret. 3 sg. of steppan.

stôpel m. _footprint_, #Bl# 127.

stoppa m. _bucket, pail_, GD, #Gl#.

-stoppian v. for-s. ['_stop_']

stôr I. m. _incense, frankincense_, Æ. [_L._ storax] II. _strong,
great_, #Chr# 1085. [_ON._ stôrr]

storc m. '_stork_,' Æ.

stôr-cille, -cyl(le) f. _censer_, Æ.

stôrfæt n. _censer_, NC 323.

storm m. _tempest, 'storm'_: (¶) _onrush, attack, tumult,
disturbance_, CP.

stormig? _stormy_, OEG 56^291.

stôrsæp n. _resin_, OEG 4027.

stôrsticca m. _rod for stirring the incense in the censer_? (BT), EC
250.

stot m. _a kind of horse_, v. NC 323.

stôw f. _spot, site, station, locality, position_, Æ, AO, CP; Mdf;
_(holy) place_, LL.

stôwigan _to retain, restrain_, Cp 1713.

stôwlic _local, limited by space_, Æ. adv. -lîce _as regards place_, Æ.

strâc pret. 3 sg. of strîcan.

strâcian _to 'stroke,'_ CP.

strâcung f. _stroking_, WW 179^9.

stræc (¯æ? e) I. _firm, strict, severe, stern, rigid, obstinate, hard_,
Æ, CP: _strenuous, vehement, violent_, Æ. [streccan] II. n. _rigour_:
_violence, force_, Æ.

stræclic _strict_, CP. adv. -lîce _strictly, severely, vehemently,
violently_, CP.

str¯æde f. _pace_, MtL 5^41.

str¯ædon pret. pl. of strêdan.

strægd pret. 3 sg. of stregdan.

strægdnes f. _aspersion_, BH 446^15.

str¯ægl = str¯æl II.

str¯æl I. fm. _arrow, dart, missile_. [_Ger._ strahl] II. f. _curtain,
quilt, matting, bed_, #Gl#. [_L._ stragula]

str¯ælbora m. _archer_, WW.

str¯æle f. = str¯æl I.

str¯ælian _to shoot (an arrow)_, #RPs# 63^5.

str¯ælwyrt f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 36b.

strængð (#VPs#) = strengð

str¯æt I. f. _'street,' high road_, Æ, CP; Mdf. [_L._ strata (via)] II.
f. _bed_, #CPs#. [_L._ stratum]

str¯ætlanu f. _street_, NC 323.

strand n. _'strand,' sea-shore_, Æ.

strang (o) comp. strengra, superl. strengest (from strenge) _'strong,'
powerful, bold, brave_, Æ, CP: _constant, resolute, strenuous_: _strict,
severe_, CP: _arduous_: _violent_.

strange adv. comp. strangor, superl. strangost _strongly, violently,
furiously, severely_.

stranghynde _strong of hand_, Æ.

±strangian _to strengthen, confirm_, Æ, AO, CP: _be strong, prevail_,
#VPs#.

stranglic _strong, stout, firm, solid, sound, robust_, Æ: _severe_. adv.
-lîce _strongly, firmly, stoutly, boldly, bravely_, Æ, CP: _fiercely,
violently_.

strangmôd _resolute_, RB 138^28.

strangnes f. _strength, power, force_.

±strangung f. _strengthening, quickening, nourishing_, Æ: _vigour_, Æ.

strapulas mp. _breeches_, WW 125^2.

strâwberige = strêawberige

strê (N), strêa = strêaw

streac = stearc

strêad pret. 3 sg. of strûdan.

streaht pp. of streccan.

strêal = str¯æl

strêam m. _'stream,' flood, current_, AO, CP: (¶) pl. _sea_.

strêamfaru f. _rush of water_, #An# 1578.

strêamgewinn n. _strife of waters_, #Rd# 4^26.

strêamlic _of water_, ÆH 1·444^10.

strêamracu f. _water-course, channel_.

strêamrâd f. _course of a stream_: _sea-path_.

strêamrynes adv. _flowing like a stream_, Æ.

strêamstæð n. _shore_, #Gen# 1434.

strêamweall m. _shore_, #Gen# 1494.

strêamwelm m. _surging stream_, #An# 495.

strêaw (ê) n. _'straw,' hay_, Æ (êo).

strêaw-berige, -beriewîse f. '_strawberry_.'

strêawian = strewian

strec (Æ) = stræc

streccan (±) _to stretch, ('i-stretche') spread out, prostrate_, _Lcd_:
_reach_, Æ.

streccanmôd _persistent_, ÆP 80^10.

strecednes f. _bed, couch_, #LPs#.

streclic = stræclic

strecnes f. _pertinacity_: _rigidity_, GD 345^2.

strêdan^3 (and wv.) pret. 3 sg. strêdde, pl. str¯ædon. (strong), pp.
strêded, strêd [= stregdan]

+strêdd _sprinkled_, #Sc# 97^12. [stregdan]  [[from first edition]]

strêgan = stregdan

stregdan^3 (and wv.) pret. strægd, strugdon (wk. stregde), pp. strogden
(wk. stregd) _to strew, sprinkle, disperse, scatter, straggle_: _to
spread, extend_.

strêgl = str¯æl II.

strehte pret. 3 sg. of streccan.

strêl = str¯æl

strên = strêowen

strênan = strîenan

streng I. m. _'string,' cord, ligature, sinew_. in pl. _tackle,
rigging_: _lineage, race_. II. = strengu

+strengan _to fortify_. +strenged _formed, made_, OEG 46^8.

strenge _severe_. #Gen# 60. [v. strang]

strengel m. _ruler, chief_, B 3115. [strang]

strengest (AO, CP) v. strang.

strenglic _strong, firm_, #Gen# 273.

strengra (Æ, AO, CP) v. strang.

strengð f., strengðu f. _'strength,' force, vigour_: _ability,
superiority_: _firmness, fortitude_, Æ: _manhood, mature years_:
_violence_.

strengu f. _strength, power, vigour, ability_, CP: _firmness,
fortitude_, CP: virtue.

strenð (#KGl#) = strengð

strêon I. (±) n. _gain, acquisition, property, treasure_, _AO, WW_; Æ,
CP: _traffic, usury_: _procreation_, Æ. ['_i-streon_'] II. = strêowen

strêonan = strîenan

+strêones (êu) f. _petty gain_, GPH 389.

+strêonful _costly, valuable, precious_, Æ.

strêow == strêaw

strêowen (ê) f. _resting-place, couch, bed_.

strêowian = strewian

strêownes f. _mattress, bedding_, #Bl# 227.

strêt I. pres. 3 sg. of strêdan. II. = str¯æt

strêw = strêaw

strêwen = strêowen

±strewian (ea, eo) _to 'strew,' scatter_, CP.

strewung f. _what one lies on_, #LPs# 131^3.

±stric n? _plague_? _strife_? _sedition_? #Lcd#, LL, W.

strica m. _stroke, line, mark_, Æ. ['_streak_']

strîcan^1 _to pass lightly over the surface, stroke, rub, wipe_: _move,
go, run_. ['_strike_']

stricel m. I. _fount, breast_, #Gl#. II. _implement for smoothing corn
in a measure_? (BT) _rope_? (ES 43·325), Cp 266#t#.

strîchrægl n. _a cloth for wiping_? CC 23^21.

+strician _to knit together, mend (nets)_, MtL 4^21.

strîdan^1 _to 'stride,'_ #Gl#. up on s. _mount (a horse)_, GD 81^29.

stride m. _stride, step_, Cp 134#p#.

±strîenan (êo, î, ý) _to acquire, gain, amass_, CP: _beget_, AO, CP:
_increase, augment_? CP. [strêon]

+strîenendlic (e, y) _begetting_, OEG: _genitive_, #ÆGr#.

strigdeð pres. 3 sg. of stregdan.

strîman^4 _to resist, oppose_, Cp.

strîna m. _acquirer_, v. OEG 27^1.

strînan = strîenan

strînend m. _acquirer_, ES 39·352.

strîpan (y) v. be-s.

stripligan '_perfringere_'? v. OEG 46^21.

strîð ¶ m. _strife, struggle, fight, contest, dispute, contention_.
[_OS._]

stroccian _to stroke_, NC 323.

+strod n. _plunder, robbery_: _confiscation_.

strôd n. _marshy land_ (_covered with bushes or trees_?) BC (Mdf); PST
95/98, 537.

stroden pp. of strûdan.

strogden pp. of stregdan.

±strogdnes f. _scattering, sprinkling_, DR.

strong == strang

strop _'struppus,' (oar)thong, strap_, WW 181^42.

strosle (GD 100^19) = ðrosle

-strowennes v. â-s.  [[headword spelled "âstrowenes"]]

+strud (GD 162^32) = +strod

±strûdan^2 _to ravage, spoil, plunder, carry off_.

strûdend m. _robber_: _money-lender_.

strûdere m. _robber_, #Gl#.

±strûdian _to plunder_, NC 296^324.

strûdung f. _spoliation, robbery_.

strugde (NG) wk. pret. 3 sg. of stregdan.

strûta = strýta

strûtian _to stand out stiffly_, ÆL 32^208.

strûtnian (ÆL 23^268) = scrûtnian

±strýdan _to rob, deprive_.

+strýdd = +strêdd

strýdere = strýndere

strýn- = strîen-, strîn-

strýnd f. _generation, line of inheritance, race, stock, tribe_.

strýndan _to waste_, WW.

strýndere m. _squanderer, prodigal_, WW.

+strynge m. _wrestler_, WW 465^40.

strýta (û) m. _ostrich_. [_L._ struthio]

stubb = stybb

stûc _heap_, ES 11·512.

studdian _to look after, be careful for_, #Kl# 17^79.

studding f. _care, trouble, labour_, #Kl# 17^63.

studu f., gs. stude, ds. styde (also indecl. in sg.), nap. styde
_column, pillar, post, buttress_. ['_stud_']

stufbæð n. _vapour bath_, #Lcd#. [stofa]

stulor _furtive, stealthy, stolen_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ.

+stun n. _din, crash, whirlwind_.

stuncen, pp., stuncon pret. pl. of stincan.

stund f. _short space of time, moment, period, time_. stunde _now, at
once, from time to time_ (v. also stundum): _hour_: _signal_. [_Ger._
stunde]

+stund n. _noise_, #Guth# 36^28 (= +stun).

-stundian v. â-s.

stundm¯ælum adv. _from time to time, gradually_: _time after time,
alternately_.

stundum adv. _from time to time, at times_, Æ: _with effort,
laboriously, eagerly, fiercely_, Æ. [dp. of stund]

stungen pp., stungon pret. pl. of stingan.

stunian _to crash, resound, roar_: _impinge, dash_. ['_stun_']

stunra (#KGl# 69^31) = stuntra, gp. of stunt.

stunt _dull, stupid, foolish_, Æ.

stuntlic _stupid, foolish_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ.

stuntnes f. _stupidity, folly_, Æ.

stuntscipe m. _foolishness_, Mk 7^22.

stuntspr¯æc f. _silly talk_.

stuntspr¯æce _talking foolishly_, W 72^17.

stuntwyrde _talking foolishly_.

stûpian _to 'stoop,'_ AO.

sturtende (DR 57^12) = styrtende  [[form of "styrtan"]]

stût m. _gnat_, WW.

stuðansceaft m. _prop_, AS 1^1,10.

stuðu = studu

stybb m. _stump_, Æ; Mdf. ['_stub_']

stycce (i) n. _piece, portion, bit, fragment_, Æ. ymbe st. _after a
short time_: _mite (small piece of money)_. [_Ger._ stück]

styccem¯ælum adv. _piecemeal, little by little, by degrees, gradually_:
_to bits, to pieces_, AO: _here and there_, AO.

stycian = stician

styde I. = stede. II. v. studu.

styfecung f. _clearing_? (_land_), Ct.

styfic _a clearing in a wood_, PST 95/98, 541.

styhtan = stihtan

stýlan _to harden, attemper_, #Cr# 679. [_Ger._ stählen]

stýle (ê) n. '_steel_,' B, #Gl#.

stýlecg _steel-edged_, B 1533.

stýlen ¶ _of steel, hard as steel_.

styll = stiell

styllan I. _to make stalls for cattle_? _or to put them in stalls_? LL
454[11,13]. II. = stiellan. III. = stillan

±styltan _to be amazed, dazed, hesitate_, NG.

stylð pres. 3 sg. of stelan.

stýman = stîeman

styng = sting

stynt = stent, pres. 3 sg. of standan.

styntan _to make dull, stupefy_, Cp 89#h#. [stunt]

stýpel = stîpel

+styr (i) n. _stir, movement_, DR 187^5.

stýr = stêor

styra = styria

stýran = (1) stîeran; (2) stêran

styrc = stirc

stýrend = stêorend

styrenes f. _power of motion, movement_: _commotion, disturbance,
tumult_: (+) _tribulation_, DR.

styrfig adj. _belonging to an animal which died of disease_, LL.
[storfe]  [[variant of "steorfa"?]]

styrfð pres. 3 sg. of steorfan.

styrgan = styrian

styria, styr(i)ga (i) m. _name of a fish, sturgeon_. [_Ger._ stör]

±styrian (i) _to 'stir,' move_ (tr. and intr.), _rouse, agitate, excite,
urge_, Æ, CP: _cause_: _tell, rehearse_, B 873.

styric = stirc

styrigendlic _moving_, Æ.

styrman _to storm, roar, rage, cry out, shout_.

styrne _'stern,' grave, strict, austere, hard, severe, cruel_.

styrnenga adv. _inexorably_, #Sol# 282.

styrnlic _hard, severe, harsh_. adv. -lîce, CP (ie).

styrnmôd _stern of mood_, #Jud# 227.

styrtan _to 'start,' leap up_. only in pres. ptc. sturtende (=
styrtende), DR 57^12.

styrung (e) f. _moving, motion_, Æ, CP: _disturbance, commotion_, Æ:
_exercise_.

styðe ds. and nap. of stuðu = studu

sû f. _sow_. [= sugu]

suâ = swâ

subdîacon m. _subdeacon_, ANS 84·15.

sûcan^2 _to 'suck,'_ _Æ, Lk, PPs, VHy_.

sucga = sugga

sucht-, suct- = suht-

sudon pret. pl. of sêoðan.

sue- = swe-

sufel, suf(o)l n. _relish eaten with bread_ (v. LL 2·754), _Jn, RB_.
['_sowl_']

+sufel, sufl adj. _with a relish added to it_? (_of bread_), Ct, LL.

suflmete m. _delicacy, relish_, GD 202^26.

sûftlêre = swiftlêre

sûgan^2 _to suck, suck in_, CP.

sugga m. _a kind of bird, titlark_? _wagtail_? #Gl#.

±sugian _to be or become silent_, AO. [cp. swîgian]

sugu f. '_sow_,' _Cp, CP_; Æ.

suht (y) f. _illness_, #Gen# 472.

suhterga m. _brother's son, nephew_: _uncle's son, cousin_.

suhtergefæderan, suhtorfædran ¶ mp. _uncle and nephew_.

suhtriga = suhterga

sûl (Æ), sulh (AO) sfm., gs sûle(s), ds. sylg (CP), syl(h), as. sûl,
sulh; nap. sylh, syll (Æ), gp. sûla, dp. sûlum _plough_: _furrow,
gully_: _a measure of land_. [Mdf]

sulf = sufl  [[under "sufel"]]

sulfer = seolfor

sulfern (DR) = seolfren

sulhæcer m. _a strip of land for ploughing_, LL 450[9,1].

sulhælmesse f. _ecclesiastical tax on ploughed land_.

sulhandla m. _plough tail_, v. OEG 2357.

sulhbêam m. _plough tail_, WW.

sulhgang m. _the land which can be gone over by one plough in a day_, W
170^37.

sulhgesîdu np. _ploughing tackle_, LL 455^17.

sulhgetêog n. _ploughing implements_, #Lcd# 1·400^19. [cp. _Ger._
gezeug]

sulhgeweorc n. _plough-making_, #Gen# 1086.

sulhhæbbere m. _ploughman_, WW 495^19.

sulhscear n. _ploughshare_.

sûlincel n. _small furrow_, WW 348^34.

sull, suluh = sûl

sulung n. _in Kent, the fiscal unit corresponding to the hide
(or carucate in other counties)_ (NED) Ct, LL. ['_suling_']

sum indef. pron. (used substantively w. g.) _a certain one, some one,
something, one_, _B, Bo, G_. sixa s. _one of six_: (used adjectivally)
_a certain_, _'some,' any_, _Æ, AO, Bo, Bl_. sume...sume
_some...others_. hit...sum...sum... _part of it...the rest..._: (used
adverbially) _about_, _Bo, Chr, G_. s. hund _about a hundred_. sumes, s.
on d¯æle _to some extent, somewhat_.

sumar, sumer == sumor

sûmnes f. _delay_, MtL 25^19. [cp. _Ger._ versäumniss]

sumor m., gs. sumeres, ds. sumera, sumere '_summer_,' AO.

sumorbôc = sumorr¯ædingbôc

sumorh¯æte f. _summer heat_, AO.

sumorhûs n. _summer-house_, ÆL 36^98.

sumorl¯æcan _to draw on towards summer_, ÆH 1·614.

sumorlang ¶ _summer-long, of the length of a summer's day_.

sumorlic _of summer_.

sumorlîda I. m. _summer army or expedition (one which only comes for the
summer)_, #Chr# 871. [lîðan] II. (= -loda) m. _shoot, twig_, WW 450^30
(v. A 13·330).

sumormæsse f. _midsummer_.

sumorr¯ædingbôc f. _summer lectionary_, TC 430^16 (e^2).

sumorselde f. _summer-house_, WW 184^1.

sumsende _swishing (of rain)_, #Rd# 4^47.

sumswêge = samswêge

sumur = sumor

sunasunu m. _son's son, grandson_.

sunbêam mf. _sunbeam_, Æ.

sunbearu m. _sunny grove_, #Ph# 33.

sunbeorht _bright with sunshine_, #Ph# 436.

sunbryne m. _sunburn_, #Lcd#.

suncen pp., suncon pret. pl. of sincan.

sund n. _swimming_, _Æ, B, AO_: _capacity for swimming_: (¶) _sea,
ocean, water_. ['_sound_']

+sund _sound ('i-sound'), whole, uninjured, healthy_, _Æ, B_.

sund-bûende ¶, -buend mp. _sea-dwellers, man, mankind_.

sundcorn n. _saxifrage_.

sundêaw _rosemary_? _sundew_? WW 301^7.

+sundelic (WW 496^24) = +syndlic  [[under "sundlic"]]

sunder == sundor

sunderanweald m. _monarchy_, ES 11·66.

sunderfolgoð m. _private office_, AO 286^5.

sunder-frêodôm, -frêols m. _privilege_, Ct.

sunderlîpes _separately, specially_, OEG 206.

sunderm¯ælum _separately, singly_.

sundermêd f. _private meadow_, Ct.

sunderstôw f. _special place_, #Bo# 80^2.

+sundful _sound, whole, wholesome_, Æ: _prosperous_, _Æ, Ps_.
['_i-sundfull_']

+sundfullian _to prosper_, #Ps#.

+sundfullic _sound, safe, sure_. adv. -lîce _safely, prosperously_, Æ.

+sundfulnes f. _health, prosperity_, Æ.

sundgebland n. _commingled sea, sea-surge, sea-wave_, B 1450.

sundgyrd (e^2) f. _sounding-rod_.

sundhelm ¶ m. _covering of water, sea_.

sundhengest ¶ m. _sea-horse, ship_.

sundhwæt _good at swimming_, #Whale# 57.

+sundig (y) _favourable_, BH 386^13Ca.

+sundlic (y) _prosperous_, BH: safe, GD 348^10. adv. -lîce.

sundlîne f. _sounding-line, lead_, WW.

sundmere m. _swimming-bath_, WW.

sundnytt f. _exercise of the power of swimming_, B 2360.

sundor adv. _asunder, apart_: _severally_: _differently_.

sundor- v. also sunder-, synder-.

sundorcræft m. _special power or capacity_.

sundorcræftiglîce _with special skill_, BH 324^3Ca.

sundorcýððu f. _special knowledge_, LL (322^32).

sundorfeoh n. _private property_, Ct.

sundorgecynd n. _special quality_, #Pa# 30.

sundorgenga m. _solitary (animal)_, #Bl# 199^5.

sundorgerêfland n. _land reserved to the jurisdiction of a 'gerêfa'?_ WW
421^11.

sundorgifu f. _special gift, privilege_.

sundorhâlga m. _Pharisee_, Æ.

sundorland n. _land set apart, private property_, GD, WW.

sundorlic _special_, CP 409^10. adv. -lîce _apart_.

sundorlîf n. _life in seclusion_, BH 294^4.

sundormæsse f. _separate mass, special mass_, #Bk# 27´; RSL 11·486.

sundornotu f. _special office_, LL 456[2].

sundornytt f. _special use, office, or service_, CP.

sundorriht n. _special right, privilege_, WW.

sundorseld (u^2) n. _special seat, throne_.

sundorsetl n. _hermitage_, #Guth#.

sundorspr¯æc f. _private conversation, private conference_, Æ, AO, CP.

sundorweorðung f. _special honour, prerogative_.

sundorwîc n. _separate dwelling_, BH 262^14.

sundorwine m. _bosom friend_, FT 29.

sundorwîs _specially wise_, #El# 588.

sundorwundor n. _special wonder_, #Mod# 2.

sundoryrfe ¶ n. _private inheritance_.

sundplega ¶ m. _sporting in the waves, bathing_.

sundrâp m. _sounding line, lead_, WW 358^17.

sundreced n. _sea-house, ark_, #Gen# 1335.

+sundrian ¶ _to separate_. ['_sunder_']

sundrum (on) adv. _singly, separately, apart_: _continuously_, CM 211.

sundur == sundor

sundwudu ¶ m. _(sea-wood), ship_.

suner (MtR) = sunor

sunfeld m. _Elysian fields_.

sunfolgend _'solisequia,' marigold_? _heliotrope_? #Gl#.

sunganges adv. _moving with the sun_, LL.

sungen pp. of (1) singan; (2) swingan.

sungihte _solstice_, MH 104^19,21.

sungon pret. pl. of singan.

sunhât '_soliflua_,' OEG 56^205.

sunlic _solar_.

sunna m. _sun_.

sunnan¯æfen m. _eve of Sunday, Saturday_. [_Ger._ Sonnabend]

sunnancorn _gromel (plant)_, #Lcd# 1·314^18?

sunnandæg m. '_Sunday_,' Æ.

sunnanlêoma m. _light of the sun, sunbeam_, GD 171, 172.

sunnanniht f. _Saturday night_, Æ: _Sunday_, LL 52[5,5].

sunnanscîma m. _sunshine_, MF 173.

sunnansetlgong m. _sunset_, #Chr# 773.

sunnanûhta m. _Sunday morning (early)_, _early service time_, Æ.

sunnb- = sunb-

sunne f. '_sun_,' Æ, AO, CP.

sunnebêam = sunbêam

sunnon pret. pl. of sinnan.

sunnu = sunne

sunor (e^2) fn. _herd of swine_, NG.

sunsceadu f. _veil_, WW 239^19.

sunscîene _radiant_, #Jul# 229.

sunscîn _mirror_, WW 519^4.

sunset n. _west_, NG.

sunstede m. _solstice_, #Lcd#.

sunsunu? m. _grandson_, v. LL 460[11n.].

sunu m., gds. suna _'son,' descendant_, _Æ, B, Bl, G, VPs_: _the Son_,
_DR, G, VPs_: _young of animals_.

sunucennicge f. _mother_, DR.

sunusunu = sunsunu

sunwlitig _fair with sunshine_, #GnC# 7.

±sûpan^2 _to swallow, sip, taste_, _'sup,' drink_, Æ, CP: (+) _sop up,
absorb_.

sûr _'sour,' tart, acid_, _BC, Lcd_: _made sour, fermented_, _Lcd, WW_.

sûre f. _sorrel_.

sûr-êagede, -êgede, -êge, -îge _(sour-eyed), blear-eyed_, Æ.

-sûrian v. â-s.

sûr-milsc, -melsc, -melst adj. _half sour and half sweet (apple)_.

sûrnes f. '_sourness_,' _WW_ 347^35.

sûsel == sûsl

sûsl nf. _misery, torment, torture_, Æ, AO.

sûslbona m. _devil_, #Sat# 640.

sûslcwalu (-sel-) f. _painful death_, W.

sûslhof n. _place of torment_, ¶Hy 10^31.

sûslstede (sel-) m. _place of torment, hell_, OEG 56^184.

suster = sweostor

sutel = sweotol

sûtere m. _shoemaker_, _Æ_. ['_souter_'; _L._]

-sûtian v. be-s.

sutol, sutul == sweotol

sûð* I. adj. comp. sûð(er)ra, sýðerra, superl. sûðmest _'south,'
southern_, _AO, Bl, Cp, LkL_. II. adv. comp. sûðor, sýð _southwards,
south_, _B, BH, Chr, Met_; AO, CP.

sûðan adv. _from the south_, CP: _on or in the south_, AO. be s.
(w. d.), wið s. (w. a.) _south of_.

sûðanêastan adv. _in or from the south-east_: _to the south-east_, AO.

sûðanêastanwind m. _south-east wind_, WW 144.

sûðanêasterne _south-eastern_, #LPs#.

Sûðanhymbre mp. _Mercians_.

sûðanweard = sûðeweard

sûðanwestan adv. _from the south-west_.

sûðanwestan-wind, -winda m. _a south-west wind_.

sûðanwind m. _south wind_.

sûðd¯æl m. _southern region, the south_, _Æ, VPs_; AO. ['_southdeal_']

sûðduru f. _south door_, #Bl# 201^15.

sûðêast adv. _south-east_, AO.

sûðêastende m. _south-east end_, #Bo# 67^31.

sûðêasterne _south-eastern_, #ÆGr# 8^2.

Sûðengle p. _South Anglians_, _people of southern England_, LL.

sûðerige _'satirion' (plant)_. [_L._ satureia? cp. sæðerie]

sûðerne _'southern,' southerly_, _Æ, Bo, Lcd, MtL_.

sûðernewudu m. _'abrotanum,' southernwood, wormwood_.

sûðerra v. sûð.

sûðeweard adj. _southward, south, southern_, AO.

sûðfolc n. _southern nation or people, Suffolk_.

sûðgârsecg m. _southern ocean_, AO.

sûðgem¯ære n. _southern border_, AO.

sûðheald ¶ _inclining southwards_.

sûðhealf f. _south side_, _AO_; Æ. ['_southhalf_']

Sûðhymbre mpl. _Mercians_, #Chr#.

sûðland n. _southern land or shore_, _Æ, Chr_. ['_southland_']

sûðm¯ægð f. _southern province_, BH.

sûðmann ¶ m. _man from the south_.

sûðmest '_southmost_,' _AO_.

Sûðmyrce (e) pl. _southern Mercians_, BH 238^34.

sûðor v. sûð.

sûðportic m. _south porch_, #Chr# 1036.

sûðra v. sûð.

sûðrihte (y) adv. _due south_, AO.

sûðrima m. _south coast_, #Chr#.

sûðrodor (a^2) m. _southern sky_.

Sûðs¯æ mf. _south sea, sea south of England, English Channel_, Æ.

Sûð-seaxan, -seaxe pl. _South-Saxons_, _people of Sussex_: _Sussex_.

sûðstæð n. _south coast_, #Chr# 897#a#.

sûðwâg m. _south wall_, Æ.

sûðweard adv. _towards the south, southwards_, _AO, Lcd_.
['_southward_']

sûðweardes adv. '_southwards_,' _Met_.

sûðweg m. _southern country_, #Ex# 155.

sûðwest I. m. _the south-west_. II. adv. '_south-west_,' _AO_.

sûðwesterne '_south-western_,' _ApT_.

sûðwind m. _south wind_, #Ex# 289.

suwian (LWS) = sugian

swâ (¯æ, ê) I. adv. and conj. (w. ind. or subj.) _so as, consequently,
just as, so far as, in such wise, in this or that way, thus, so that,
provided that_, _Æ, B, Bo_. swâ swâ _so as, just as, so that_. swâ same
(swâ) _in like manner_: _therefore, on that account_: _as, like_, _B,
Bo, Bl_: (w. comparatives) _the_. swâ...swâ _the...the_: _where_: _when,
so soon, as soon_: _although, unless, yet_: _if, as if_. II. pron.
_'so,' the same, such, that_. swâ hwâ swâ _whosoever_. swâ hw¯ær swâ
_wherever_. bi swâ hwaðerre efes swâ _on whichever side_. swâ ilce =
swilce. swâ selfe _in the same way_. êac swâ _also_. swâ hwilc swâ
_whosoever_. swâ...ne _though...not_. swâ...swâ _whether...or_. swâ ðêah
_nevertheless, yet, however_.

swâc pret. 3 sg. of swîcan.

sw¯æ = swâ

swæc (CP), swæcc (e) m. _flavour, taste_: _smell, odour, fragrance_.

+swæccan (e) _to smell_ (tr.), DD 206; (intr.) #ARPs# 113^14.

swæcehêow '_insania_'? #RPs# 395^5 (v. ES 38^22).

swæf pret. 3 sg. of swefan.

sw¯æfan? _to burn_, #Met# 8^47.

swæfen = swefn

swæflen = sweflen

swæg == swêg

swægl = swegl

±sw¯ælan (tr.) _to burn_.

swælc = swilc

sw¯æm m. _trifler, idler_: _vain object_.

-sw¯æman v. â-s.

swæncan = swencan

sw¯æp _enticement, persuasion, deceit_? (v. OEG 2894n).

+sw¯æpa (â, ê) pl. _sweepings, rubbish_. [swâpan]

sw¯æpels (#VPs#) m? sw¯æpelse f. _robe, garment_.

sw¯æpig _fraudulent_, OEG 2894.

sw¯ær I. (â, ê) _heavy, sad_: _oppressive, grievous_: _sluggish,
inactive, weak_. II. n. _sadness, trouble_, MF 173.

sw¯ærbyrd? f. _difficult birth_? #Lcd# 185a.

sw¯ære ¶ (â) _grievously, oppressively_.

+sw¯ære = sw¯ær

+sw¯æred _oppressed, weighed down_, #Lcd#.

sw¯ærlic adj. _sore, deep, heavy_, Æ.

sw¯ærlîce (â) adv. _grievously, heavily_, Æ.

sw¯ærmôd _indolent, sluggish_, W 257.

sw¯ærmôdnes (â) f. _dulness, stupidity_, CP 149^15.

sw¯ærnes (â) f. _heaviness_, Æ: _sluggishness_.

swært (WW 2573^3) = sweart

±sw¯æs (ê) _intimate, special, favourite, dear, beloved_: _own_:
_agreeable, gentle, benevolent_: _sweet, sugary_.

+swæse _blandly, pleasantly_.

sw¯æsenddagas mpl. _ides (in Roman calendar)_, WW.

sw¯æsende (ê) n. (mostly used in pl. sw¯æsendu) _food, meal, dinner,
banquet, dainties_: _blandishments_.

sw¯æsing- = sw¯æsend-

±sw¯æsl¯æcan (ê^1) _to wheedle_.

sw¯æslic _kind, friendly, agreeable_. adv. -lîce _pleasantly, kindly_:
_properly_: _plausibly_.

±sw¯æsnes f. _blandishment, wheedling_, Æ: _pleasure_.

sw¯æsung f. _lenitive, soothing application_, WW 241^24.

sw¯æswyrde _fair spoken_, WW 190^35.

±sw¯ætan _to sweat, exude_, AO: _labour, toil_, CP: _bleed_, #Cross# 20:
(+) _oppress_, #CPs# 93^5. [swât]

swæð (e) n., nap. swaðu _footprint, track_, CP: _trace, vestige_, CP.
[cp. swaðu f.]

swæðel = sweðel

swæðelyne '_pinguis_,' OEG 27^32.

swæðer pron. _whichever, whosoever_, CP. [swâ, hwæðer]

+swæðian _to trace out, investigate_, #EPs# 138^3.

swæðl¯æcan _to search out, visit_, CHy 9^68.

swæðorian = swaðrian, sweðrian

sweðu = swaðu

swâf pret. 3 sg. of swîfan.

swâhwætswâ pron. _whatsoever_.

swâhwæðer pron. _whichever_.

swalewe = swealwe

swaloð = swoloð, sweoloð

swalwe = swealwe

swâmian _to become dark_, #Gu# 1069.

swamm (o) I. m. _fungus, mushroom_, Æ: _sponge_. [_Ger._ schwamm] II.
pret. 3 sg. of swimman.

swan (o) m. '_swan_.'

swân m. _herdsman, swineherd, peasant_: (¶)_swain, youth, man, warrior_.

swanc pret. 3 sg. of swincan.

swancor ¶ _slender, trim, lithe, supple_: _languishing, weak_.

swang pret. 3 sg. of swingan.

swângerêfa m. _swineherd reeve, officer set over the depasturing of
swine in forests_, Ct.

swangettung f. _movement, agitation_, ANS 101·323.

swangor == swongor

swanrâd f. _swan's-road, sea_, B 200.

swânriht n. _law as to swineherds_, LL 449[6,1].

swânsteorra m. _evening star_, Cp 145#u#.

+swâpa = +sw¯æpa

±swâpan^7 _to sweep, drive, swing, rush (of wind)_. [_Ger._ schweifen]

swâr == sw¯ær

swarc- = swearc-

-swarian (e, eo, o) v. and-s.

swarn- = sworn-

swart = sweart

swâs = sw¯æs

swât m? n? _'sweat,' perspiration, exudation_, CP: (¶) _blood_: _foam_,
LkR 9^39: _toil_: _labour_, Æ.

swatan (â?) pl. _beer_, WW.

swâtclâð m. '_sudarium_', _napkin_, ÆP 178^2.

swâtfâh ¶ _blood-stained, bloody_.

swâtig _sweaty_, AO: (¶) _gory_.

swâtighlêor _with sweaty brow_, #Gen# 934 (or? two words).

swâtlîn n. _napkin_, CP.

swâtswaðu f. _gory track_, B 2946.

swâtðyrel n. _pore of the skin_, WW 159^13.

swâðêah adv. _however, yet, nevertheless_.

swâðêahhwæðre adv. _however_, Æ.

swâðêana adv. _however_.

swaðer = swæðer

swaðian _to swathe, wrap up_, #Kl# 17^109.

swaðorian, swaðrian = sweðrian

swaðu (æ, e) f. _footstep, track, pathway_: _trace, vestige_: _scar_.
['_swath_'; cp. swæð]

swaðul m? _smoke_, B 782. [_Ger._ schwaden]

swê = swâ

swealewe = swealwe

swealg, swealh pret. 3 sg. of swelgan.

swealt pret. 3 sg. of sweltan.

swealwe (a, o) f. '_swallow_.'

swearc pret. 3 sg. of sweorcan.

swearcian _to become dark_, Æ.

swearcmôdnes (a) f. _pusillanimity_, #LPs# 54^9.

swearcung (a) f. _darkness_, #RPs# 17^29.

sweard f? _hide, rind, skin_, #Gl#. ['_sward_']

swearm m. _'swarm,' multitude_.

sweart _swarthy, black, dark_, Æ: _gloomy_: _evil, infamous_.
['_swart_']

swearte ¶ adv. _miserably, evilly_.

swearth¯æwen _dark-blue, purple, violet_, WW 376^24.

±sweartian _to become black_, Æ: _make black_.

sweartlâst _with black tracks_, #Rd# 27^11.

sweartnes f. _blackness, black substance_, #Gl#.

sweartung f. _darkness_, #EPs# 17^29.

swearð = sweard

±swebban _to put to sleep, lull_: (¶) _kill_. [swefan]

swec (#KGl#) == swæc

swefan^5 _to sleep, slumber, rest_: (¶) _sleep in death_: _cease_.

swefecere m. _sleeper_, NC 324.

swefecung f. _sleep_, NC 324.

swefed pp. of swebban.

swefel (æ) m. _sulphur_, Æ. [_Ger._ schwefel]

swefelrêc m. _sulphurous smoke_, #VPs# 10^7.

swefen == swefn

swefet = sweofot

swefeð pres. 3 sg, of swebban.

+swefian _to put to sleep, lull, appease_, Æ.

swefl = swefel

sweflen _sulphurous, of brimstone_, AO.

sweflennes (eo^1) f. _sulphurousness_, MF 123^3.

sweflenrêc (#APs#) = sweflrêc  [[headword spelled "swefelrêc"]]

sweflsweart _sulphurous_? WW 49^20.

sweflðrosm m. _sulphurous smoke_, #ERSPs# 10^7.

swefn n. (often pl.) _sleep_, Æ, AO, CP: _dream, vision_. [swebban]

swefnian (w. a. pers.) _to dream_: (w. nom. pers.) _appear in a dream_.

swefnigend m. _dreamer_, Æ.

swefnracu f. _interpretation of dreams_, LL (154^29).

swefnreccere m. _interpreter of dreams_, WW 366^12.

swefot = sweofot

swêg (¯æ) m. _sound_, Æ, AO, CP: _noise, clamour, tumult_: _melody,
harmony, tone_, Æ: _voice_: _musical instrument_: '_persona_,' #Sc#.
[swôgan]

swêgan _to make a noise, sound, roar, crash_, Æ: _import, signify_, Æ.

swêgcræft m. _art of playing on an instrument, music_, #ApT# 16.

swêgdynn m. _noise, crash_, #Cr# 955.

±swêge _sonorous, harmonious_, ÆL.

swegel == swegl

swêgendlic adj. _vocal, vowel_, #ÆGr# 6^15.

sweger f. _mother-in-law_, Æ. [_Ger._ schwieger]

swêgesweard m. _organist_ (!) JGPh 1·64.

swêghlêoðor ¶ m. _sound, melody_.

swêging f. _sound, clang, roar_.

swegl ¶ (æ) I. n. _sky, heavens, ether_: _the sun_: _music_? II. = segl

sweglbefalden _ether-begirt_, #Sat# 588.

sweglbeorht _ether-bright, radiant_, #Gu# 1187.

sweglbôsm m. _heaven, sky_, #Gen# 9 (pl.).

sweglcondel f. _heaven's candle, sun_, #Ph# 108.

sweglcyning ¶ m. _King of heaven_.

swegldrêam ¶ m. _music_. [cp. _Goth._ swiglôn]

swegle ¶ I. adj. _bright, ether-like, clear, brilliant, splendid_. II.
adv. _clearly, brightly_.

sweglhorn m. _kind of musical instrument_, #Gl#.

swêglic _sonorous_, CM 675.

sweglrâd ¶ f. _modulation, music_.

swegltorht ¶ _heavenly-bright_.

sweglwered (gel-) _ether-clad_, B 606.

sweglwuldor n. _heavenly glory_, #Gu# 1160.

sweglwundor n. _heavenly wonder_, #Gu# 1292.

swegr = sweger

+swegra = +swigra

+swêgsumlîce? _unanimously_, HL 18^182.

swehor (#Gl#) = swêor

sweig (#KGl# 88^4) = swêg

sweigð = swêgeð, pres. 3 sg. of swêgan.

+swel = +swell

swelan^4 _to burn, be burnt up_: _inflame (of wound)_.

swelc (AO, CP) = swilc. [v. '_such_']

swelca m. _pustule_, WW 112^17.

swelce = swilce

+swelg n. _abyss_, OEG.

±swelgan^3 _to 'swallow,' incorporate, absorb, imbibe, devour_. [_Ger._
schwelgen]

swelgend (y) fmn. (±) _whirlpool, vortex, gulf, abyss_, CP:
_gormandiser, glutton, drunkard, debauchee_, AO.

swelgendnes f. _whirlpool_, WW 373^2.

swelgere m. _glutton_, WW 102^15.

swelgnes f. _whirlpool_, WW 510^18.

swelhð = swelgð pres. 3 sg. of swelgan.

sweliend = swelgend

+swell n. _swelling, tumour, boil_, Æ.

±swellan^3 _to 'swell.'_

swelling f. _swelling_, #El# 245.

±sweltan^3 (i, y) _to die, perish_, Æ, AO, CP.

sweltendlic _about to die_.

-swemman v. be-s.

±swenc m. _trouble, tribulation, toil_: (+) _temptation_, #LkL# 22^46.

±swencan (æ) _to vex, distress, trouble, afflict, torment, oppress_, Æ,
CP. [causative of swincan]

+swencednes f. _trouble, affliction_, Æ.

sweng m. _stroke, blow, cut, thrust_. [swingan]

swengan _to swing, rush, fly out_. ['_swinge_'; causative of swingan]

sweocol (CP) = swicol

sweofl- = swefl-

sweofot (e) n. _sleep_.

swêogian = swîgian

sweolce = swilce

Swêoland n. _Sweden_, AO 19^2.

sweoloð (a, o) m. _burning heat, glow, fire, flame_. [swelan]

sweoloðhât '_squalidus_,' OEG 56^202 (o^1).

sweolung? f. _inflammation_, #Lcd# 76b (sweop-).

Swêon pl. _Swedes_.

swêop pret. 3 sg. of swâpan.

sweop- = swip-

sweopung v. sweolung.

swêor I. (ê, ý) mf. _pillar, column, prop_, _CP_: _bolt, bar_, ES
37·183. II. m. father-in-law, Æ, AO, CP: (±) _cousin_. [_Ger._ schwäher]
III. = swôr pret. of swerian.

swêora (î, îo, û, ý) m. neck, nape, AO, CP. [_ON._ svîre]

swêorbân n. _neck-bone, neck_.

swêorbêag (u) m. _neck-band, necklace, collar, torque_, Æ.

±sweorc (o) n. _cloud, darkness, mist_.

±sweorcan^3 _to grow dark, darken_ (intr.), _become overcast, be
obscured_: _be troubled, sad, become grievous, troublesome, angry_, ÆL:
_fall out (of mind)_, #JPs# 30^13.

sweorcendferhð _sombre, sad_, #Jud# 269.

±sweorcenes (o, cn) f. _gloom_.

swêorclâð m. _neckcloth_, WW 210^36.

swêorcops m. _yoke, pillory_, #Gl#.

swêorcoðu f. _quinsy_, #Lcd#.

sweord (o, u, y) n. '_sword_,' Æ, AO, CP.

sweordbealo n. _sword-bale_, B 1147.

sweordberende _sword-bearing_, #Gen# 1060.

sweordbite m. _sword-wound_, #Jul# 603.

sweordbora (u) m. _sword-bearer, swordsman_.

sweordfætels m. _sword-belt_, Æ.

sweordfreca m. _swordsman, warrior_, B 1468.

sweordgenîðla § m. _sworded foe_.

sweordgeswing § (y^1) n. _sword-brandishing_.

sweordgifu (y^1) f. _gift of swords_, B 2884.

sweordgripe m. _sword-attack_, #Jul# 488.

sweordhwîta (u, y) m. _sword-furbisher_.

sweordlêoma § (u^1) m. _flashing of swords_.

+sweordod (u) _provided with a sword_, Æ.

sweordplega m. fighting. #Wald# 22.

sweordr¯æs m. _attack_, #Ap# 59.

sweordslege m. _sword-thrust_, #Jul# 671.

sweordtîg f. _'framea,' sword-sheath_? #LPs# 9^7. [têag]

sweordwegende (u^1) _sword-bearing_.

sweordwîgend m. _warrior_, #Ex# 260.

sweordwund § _wounded with the sword_.

sweordwyrhta (u^1) m. _sword-maker_? #Lcd# 3·194^10.

+sweorf (y) n. _filings_, #Lcd#.

±sweorfan^3 _to file or grind away, polish, wipe, rub, scour_.
['_swerve_']

swêorhnitu f. _nit which lives on the neck of animals, tick_, WW.

Swêorîce n. _Sweden_, B.

swêorracentêh (û^1) f. _'catelle,' neck-chain_, WW 107^34.

swêorrôd f. _cross worn on the neck_, _EC_ 250 (û). [v. '_rood_']

swêorscacul m. _yoke, pillory_, WW 116^9.

swêortêag (ê) f. _collar_, #Gl#.

+swêoru (î, ý) np. _hills_, #PPs#.

swêorwærc m. _pain in the neck_, #Lcd#.

sweostor (e, i, u, y) f. indecl. in sg., nap. sweoster, sweostra,
sweostru '_sister_,' _Chr_; Æ, AO: _nun_, _BH_.

+sweos-tor, -tra, -tru fp. _sisters_, AO. +sweosternu bearn _children of
sisters, cousins_.

sweostorbearn n. _sister's child, nephew, niece_, WW 452^2.

sweostorsunu m. _sister's son, nephew_, OET. [v. '_sister_']

swêot ¶ n. _troop, army, company, body, swarm_.

sweota? sweote? '_scrotum_,' #Lcd#, v. A 30·134.

sweotel = sweotol

sweotol (i, u, y) _distinct, clear, evident, manifest, open, public_,
AO, CP. [cp. _Goth._ swikunðs]

sweotole (e, o, u) adv. _clearly, precisely, plainly, openly,
visibly_, CP.

±sweotolian (e, u, y) _to show, reveal, make manifest_: _state, explain,
prove_.

sweotollic (y^1) _clear, distinct_. adv. -lîce _clearly, precisely,
plainly, visibly, openly_, Æ.

±sweotolung (i, u, y) f. _manifestation, Epiphany_: _definition,
explanation, exposition, declaration_, Æ: _written testimony,
documentary evidence_.

sweotolungdæg (e, u) m. _Epiphany_, Æ.

sweotul = sweotol

swêoðeod f. _Swedes, Sweden_.

sweoðerian = sweðrian

sweoðol I. m? _heat, flame_, B 3145. [cp. swaðul] II. = sweðel

swêowian = swîgian

+swêpa = +sw¯æpa

swêr = (1) swâr; (2) sweger; (3) swêor

±swerian^6 (but occl. wk. pret. swerede) _to 'swear,'_ Æ, AO, CP:
_speak_? #Sol# 425. [_Ger._ schwören]

swerigendlic _jurative, used in swearing (of certain adverbs)_, #ÆGr#.

swertling m. _titlark_? _warbler_? WW 131^15.

swês == sw¯æs

swester (N) = sweostor

±swêtan _to make sweet, sweeten_, Æ, CP.

swête I. adj. _'sweet,' pure, fragrant, pleasant, agreeable_, AO, CP.
II. n. _sweetness, sweet_. [swôt]

swetelian (#KGl#) = sweotolian

swêtian _to be sweet_, CP 425^14.

+swêtl¯æcan _to batten_, #RPs# 65^15.

swêtlîce _sweetly, pleasantly_, BH 486^4.

swêtmete m. _'sweetmeat,' dainty_, CP 41^15.

swêtnes f. _sweetness, fragrance_, CP: _pleasantness_.

swetole = sweotole

swêtswêge _agreeable (of sound)_, DHy 58^8.

swêtwyrde _smooth-spoken_, WW: _stuttering_, WW.

sweð = swæð

sweðel (æ, eo) m. _swaddling band, bandage, binding_.

sweðerian = sweðrian

-sweðian v. be-.

sweðolian _to relent, be appeased_, #Chr# 1123.

±sweðrian (a, æ, eo, i) _to retire, vanish, melt away, abate, dwindle,
decrease, subside_.

+sweðrung (æ) f. _failure_, #Lcd#.

sweðu = swaðu

sweðung f. _poultice_.

swic n. _illusion_, CM 441.

+swic n. _offence_, MtR, WW.

swica m. _deceiver, traitor, betrayer_.

±swîcan^1 (¶) _to wander_: (¶) _depart_: (w. g.) _cease from, yield,
give away_, _AO_; CP: (w. d.) _fail, fall short, be wanting, abandon,
desert, turn traitor_: _deceive_, Æ. ût s. _go forth_. from s. _fall
off, rebel_. ['_i-swike_']

swicc m. _odour, smell, scent_.

swiccræft m. _treachery_.

swicdôm m. _fraud, deception, deceit_, Æ, AO: _betrayal, treason_:
_scandal, offence_.

swice I. m. (¶) _escape, end_: (¶) _procrastination, delay_, #Gu# 1007:
_offence, snare, treachery, deceit_. II. adj. _fallacious, deceitful_.
III. f. _trap, snare_, #Gl#. IV. = swicc

swîcend m. _deceiver_, HL 18^39,87.

+swicennes f. _abstention, cessation_, Æ: _repentance_.

swicful _fraudulent, deceitful_, #Gl#.

swician _to wander_: _be treacherous, deceive, cheat_, Æ: _blaspheme_:
_cause to offend_.

+swîcing f. _intermission, cessation_, CM 103.

±swicn f. _purgation, clearance, discharge_, LL.

+swîcnan _to clear (of a charge)_, LL.

swicol _guileful, false, deceitful_, Æ.

swicollic _fraudulent, deceiving, deceptive, causing to stumble_. adv.
-lîce.

swicolnes f. _deceit_.

swîcung f. _deceit, fraud, deception_: _stumbling-block, offence_.

swîfan^1 _to revolve, sweep, wend_: _intervene_, EC 164. [_Ger._
schweifen]

swiforu == swipor

swift (y) _'swift,' quick_, Æ, AO. adv. -lîce. [swîfan]

swiftlêre (u, y) m. _slipper_, Æ. [_L._ subtalaris]

swiftnes f. _swiftness, speed_, Æ.

swiftu f. _swiftness_, #Met# 28^3.

swîgan = swîgian

swîgdagas mp. _days of silence (last three days of Holy Week)_, Æ.

swîge I. swigge f. _silence, stillness, rest_, Æ, CP. II. adj. _still,
quiet, silent, taciturn_, CP.

swîgen f. _silence_, ÆH 2·532^4.

swîgeniht f. _night of silence_, ÆP 154^3 (v. swîgdagas).

±swîgian (ý; î, êo, û) _to be or become silent, keep silence, be quiet,
still_, CP.

swîgiendlîce adv. _silently_, HL 18^311.

swîglung f. _silence_, ANS 84·3.

swîgmæsse f. _silent mass_, NC 324.

swîgnes f. _time of silence_, WW 211^42.

+swigra (e) m. _sister's son, nephew, cousin_.

swîgtîma (swît-) m. _silent time, eventide, early part of the night_, A
8·319.

swîgûht m. _dawn of the days of silence_ (v. swîgdagas), ANS 84·7.

±swîgung f. _silence_: _time of silence_: _delay_, NG.

swîgunga adv. _quietly, secretly_.

swilc (æ, e, y) pron. (used substantively) _such a one, he, the same_,
_Æ_: (used adjectivally) '_such_,' _Bl, CP_, _etc._: (as relative)
_which_, (Æ). swilc...hwilc _such...as_; _so...as_. swilc...swilc _so
much (many)...as_; _as much (many)...as_, _Æ, B, Bl, Bo_.

swilce (e, eo, y) adv. and conj. (w. ind.) _just as, as, in like manner,
in such manner, likewise, resembling, thus_: (w. subj.) _as if, as
though_: _also, moreover, too_, _Bo_. ['_such_']

swilcnes f. _'qualitas,' nature_.

swile (y) m. _tumour, swelling_. [swellan; _Ger._ schwiele]

swilian, swillan _to 'swill,' wash, wash out, gargle_.

swiling, swilling f. _swilling, wash, gargle_.

swilt = swylt

swiltan = sweltan

swilð pres. 3 sg. of swellan.

swîlunge = swîglunga  [[form of "swîglung"?]]

swîma m. _vertigo, dizziness_: _swoon_, Æ.

swîmæsse = swîgmæsse

±swimman^3 (y) _to 'swim,' float_.

swimmendlic (y) _able to swim_, #ÆGr# 55^3.

swîn (ý) n. _wild boar, pig, hog_, pl. '_swine_,' CP; Mdf: _boar-image
(on a helmet)_, B.

+swin n. _song, melody_, #Ph# 137.

+swinc n. _toil, work, effort_, _Æ_: (±) _hardship_, _Gen_.
['_i-swinch_']

±swincan^3 _to labour, work at, strive, struggle_, Æ, CP: _be in
trouble_: _languish_. ['_swink_']

+swincdagas mp. _days of tribulation_, #Seaf# 2.

±swincful _toilsome, painful, disastrous_, Æ.

+swincfulnes f. _tribulation_, #LPs# 33^7.

±swinclêas (y) _without toil_, ÆH 2·364^9.

swinclic _laborious_? _manual_? (_of work_), W 294^17.

+swincnes f. _hardship_? NC 345.

swind = spind

swindan^3 _to vanish, consume, pine away, languish_. [_Ger._ schwinden]

swînen adj. _pig's, swine's_.

+swing ¶ I. n. _surge, fluctuation_. II. = +swinc

swingan^3 I. _to beat, strike, smack, whip, scourge, flog, chastise,
afflict_, Æ, AO, CP. sw. on twâ _divide by a blow_: _'swing' oneself,
fly_, B 2264. [_Ger._ schwingen] II. = swincan

swinge (y) f. _stroke, blow, stripe_: _chastisement_, CP.

swingell f. (often swingel-, swingl- in obl. cases); swingel(l)e f.
_whip, scourge, rod_, Æ: _stroke, stripe, blow_: _affliction_, CP.

swingere m. _striker, scourger_, #Rd# 28^7.

swinglung f. _dizziness_.

swînhaga m. _pig-pen_, Ct.

swînhyrde (î) m. _swineherd_, ZDA 33·230^21.

swînin (#Gl#) = swînen

swînlîc n. _boar-image (on a helmet)_, B 1452.

swinn m. _melody_, OEG.

swînnes f. _pork food_, #EPs# 16^14.

swinsian (y) _to sound melodiously, make melody, sing_.

swinsung f. _melody, harmony_.

swinsungcræft m. _music_, WW 442^12.

swinsweg? (v. OEG xxxiii), _melody_.

swipa m., swipe f. = swipu

swipian ¶ (eo) _to whip, scourge, beat_. ['_swipe_']

±swipor _cunning_, A, BH. adv. -lîce.

+swipornes (e^2) f. _wile, cunning_, HL, MkR.

swippan = swipian

swipu (eo, o) f. _whip, stick, scourge_: _chastisement, affliction_.
[_Ger._ schwippe]

swir- = sweor-

swîr- = swêor-

+swiria = +swigra

swirman _to swarm_, #Lcd# 1·384^22.

swister = sweostor

swital, switel, switol == sweotol

swîtîma = swîgtîma

swîð (ý) _strong, mighty, powerful, active_: _severe, violent_. comp.
swiðre _right (hand, side, etc.)_.

±swîðan [wv. and sv^1? cp. unforswiðen] _to strengthen, establish,
support_: _use force against_, Æ (v. A 36·66).

swîðe (ý) adv. _very much, exceedingly, severely, violently, fiercely_,
Æ, AO, CP. comp. swîðor _more, rather_. superl. swîðost _most,
especially, exceedingly_: _almost, nearly_. for swîðe, swîðe swîðe _very
much, very severely_, CP.

swîðfæstnes f. _violence_, LL (138^27).

swîðfeorm _rich, fruitful_: _violent_.

swîðfeormende _becoming violent_, WW 374^11.

swîðferhð ¶ (y) _bold, brave, rash_.

±swîðfrom _very strong, vigorous_. adv. -lîce.

swîðhwæt _very active_, #Run# 5.

swîðhycgende (i) ¶ _bold-minded_.

swîðian _to become strong_: _prevail_: _fix_.

swîðlic _intense, excessive, severe, violent_, Æ: _immense_, Æ:
_effective_. adv. -lîce, AO, CP.

swîðlicnes f. _excess_, RBL 73^7.

swîðmihtig _very mighty_, #PPs# 85^13.

swîðmôd _stout-hearted, brave_: _insolent, arrogant_.

swîðmôdnes f. _magnanimity_.

swîðnes f. _excess, violence_, CM 458.

swîðor comp. of swîðe.

swîðra comp. of swîð.

swiðrian = sweðrian

swîðrian _to avail, prevail_, Æ.

swîðsnel _very quick, agile_, #Cra# 82.

swîðspecende (ý) _verbose, talkative_, OEG 56^140.

swîðsprecel _talkative_, #LPs# 11^4.

swîðstincende _strong-smelling_, WW 408^18.

swîðstrang _very strong_, BH 38^6#b#.

swîðstrême _having a strong current, rapid_, BH 38^6.

swîðswêge _strong-sounding, heroic_, OEG.

swîður = swîðor comp. of swîðe.

swiung f. _spasm, cramp_, WW 112^19.

swîunga = swîgunga

swodrian _to be fast asleep_, #SPs# 3^5.

swoeg = swêg

swoesendu = sw¯æsendu  [[form of "sw¯æsende"]]

swoetnes (#Gl, VPs#) = swêtness  [[headword spelled "swêtnes"]]

swôg (#VPs#) = swêg

swôgan^7 _to sound, roar, howl, rustle, whistle, rattle_, _Cr, Gen_.
['_sough_']

+swogen _in a swoon, silenced, dead_, Æ.

+swogennes v. in-s.  [[headword spelled "inswôgennes"]]

+swôgung f. _swooning_, #Lcd#.

swol n. _heat, burning, flame, glow_. [swelan; _Ger._ schwül]

swoleð = sweoloð

swolgen pp. of swelgan.

swolgettan _to gargle, wash the throat_, #Lcd#.

swolig f. _burning_, #Lcd#, WW.

swollen pp. of swellan.

swoloð, swoloða m., swoloðe? f. (OEG 23^55) = sweoloð

swolten pp. of sweltan.

swoluð (Æ) = sweoloð

swolwe = swealwe

swom = swamm I. and II.

swon = swan

swoncor = swancor

swong = swang pret. 3 sg. of swingan.

swongor _heavy, inert_. [_Ger._ schwanger]

swongornes f. _sloth, laziness_, CP.

swonrâd = swanrâd

swopu (NG) = swipu

swor (#Ex# 239) = spor

swôr I. pret. 3 sg. of swerian. II. = sâr. III. = swêor

swôra = swêora

sworc == sweorc

sworcen pp. of sweorcan.

sword = sweord

sworen pp. of swerian.

swôretendlic _breathing hardly, short-winded_, WW 355^9.

swôrettan _to breathe hard, pant, yawn, sigh_, Æ.

swôret-ung, -tung f. _hard breathing, panting, sobbing, sighing,
moaning_, Æ.

sworfen pp. of sweorfan.

swornian (a) _to coagulate_, #Gl#.

swôron pret. pl. of swerian.

swostor = sweostor

swôt _sweet_, _JnL, Nar, OEG_. adv. swôte _ÆGr_. ['_soot_']

swôtlic _savoury, sweet_, CP 311^8. adv. -lîce.

swôtmete m. _sweetmeat, dainty_, #Bo# 33^23.

swôtnes f. _sweetness_, _DR, Shr_. ['_sootness_']

swotol = sweotol

swôt-stence, -stencende _sweet-smelling_.

swoðung = sweðung

+swôwung = +swôgung

swûgian (CP) = swîgian

swulc = swilc

swulgon pret. pl. of swelgan.

swulton pret. pl. of sweltan.

swulung = sulung

swummon pret. pl. of swimman.

swuncon pret. pl. of swincan.

-swundennes v. â-s.

swungen pp., swungon pret. pl. of swingan.

swur- = sweor-

swûr- = swêor-

swust-er, -or, -ur (Æ) = sweostor

swut-el-, -ol-, -ul- = sweotol-

swûwian = swîgian

swyc- = swic-

swyft == swift

swýg- = swîg-

swýge = swîge

swyl- = swil-

swyliend = swelgend

swylt (i) m. _death_. [sweltan]

swylt- = swelt-

swyltcwalu ¶ f. _agony of death_.

swyltdæg ¶ m. _death-day_.

swyltdêað m. _death_, #PPs# 55^11.

swylthwîl ¶ f. _hour of death_.

swym- = swim-

swýn == swîn

swyn- = swin-

swyp- (N) = sweop-

swýr == swêor

swyrd == sweord

swyrfð pres. 3 sg. of sweorfan.

+swýsnes = +sw¯æsnes

swyster = sweostor

swytel, swytol == sweotol

swýð == swîð

swýwian = sûgian, swîgian

sý = sîe pres. subj. of bêon.

syb, sybb == sibb

±sýcan (ê, î) _to suckle_: _wean_, #ASPs# 130^2. [sûcan]

syce (i, î?) _suckling_, OEG 57^8.

sýclian = sîclian

sycomer m. _sycamore_, #Bk# 4.

sýcð pres. 3 sg. of sûcan; sýcan.

+syd n. _wallowing-place_, WW 146^15. [sêoðan]

sýd == sîd

+sydian = +sidian

syfan == seofon

syfe = sife

sýfer¯æte _abstemious_, RB 119^25.

sýferlic (ê) _neat, cleanly, pure, sober_. adv. -lîce.

sýferne asm. of sýfre.

sýfernes f. _cleanliness, purity, sobriety, moderation_, Æ.

syfeða = seofoða

syfian = seofian

+syflan _to provide with relishes, flavour_. [sufl]  [[under "sufel"]]

syflige, syfling (Æ) f. _food, pap, broth, soup_: _seasoning, relish_.

syfol = sufel

syfon = seofon

sýfre (ê, î) _clean, pure, chaste, sober, abstinent, temperate_, Æ.
[_Ger._ sauber]

syftan = siftan

syge I. m. _sight, aspect, view_, FT 64? II. = sige I.

sygel = sigel

sygor = sigor

syh = seoh imperat. of sêon

syht = suht

syhð pres. 3 sg. of sêon I. and II.

+syhðe (#BPs# 120^4) = +sehðe

syl = syle

sýl I. f. _column, pillar, support_, AO. [_Ger._ säule] II. ds. of sûl,
sulh.  [[simple word "sûl", compounds "sulh"]]

sýla m. _ploughman_, OEG 2357. [sulh]  [[under "sûl"]]

sýlæx f. _a kind of axe_, WW 379^33 (v. ES 43·327).

syle, sylen _miry place, wallowing-place_, OEG. [sol]

sylen = selen

syleð pres. 3 sg. of syllan.

sylf == self

sylfer, sylfor, sylfur (M) = seolfor

sylfren (Æ) = seolfren

sylfwill- (Æ) = selfwill-

sylg ds., sylh ds. and nap. of sûl, sulh.
  [[simple word "sûl", compounds "sulh"]]

Sýlhearwa = Sigelhearwa

+sylhðe n. _team of oxen_. [sulh]  [[under "sûl"]]

sylian _to sully, soil, pollute_, _CP, Met_. ['_sule_']

syll I. f. _'sill', threshold, foundation, base, basis_, _Æ, B, CP_. II.
nap. of sulh.  [[under "sûl"]]

sylla m. _giver_, RBL 25^6. [sellan]

sýlla (#Deor# 6) = sêlla (sêlra) v. sêl I.

syllan (Æ) = sellan

sylle = syll I.

syllend (Æ) = sellend

syllic == seldlic

sylofr = seolfor

sylofren = seolfren

sýlra = sêlra v. sêl I.

±syltan (e) _to salt, season_, Æ. [sealt]

sýma = sêma

sýman = sîeman

symbel I. n. _feast-day, festivity, revel, feast_, AO: (¶) _festival,
holy day_. II. == simbel

symbelcalic m. _chalice_, TC 515^28.

symbelcennes f. _feast of a nativity_, DR.

symbeldæg m. _feast-day, festival, holiday_, Æ.

symbele = simble

symbelgâl _boisterous with carousing, drunk_, DD 79.

symbelgereord n. _banqueting, feasting, carousal_, #Sol# 407.

symbelgifa m. _giver of feasts_, #An# 1419.

symbelhûs n. _guest-chamber_, LkLR 22^12.

symbelian = symblian

symbellic _festive_: _solemn_. adv. -lîce _solemnly_.

symbelmônaðlic adj. _of a festival month_? WW 375^38.

symbelnes f. _festival, feasting, festivity_, Æ: _solemn assembly,
solemn office_.

symbeltîd f. _festival-time_.

symbelwêrig _weary with feasting_, #Gen# 2640.

symbelwlonc _elated with feasting_, #Mod# 40.

symbelwynn f. _joy of feasting_, B 1782.

symblan _to feast, banquet_, CP.

symble (Æ) = simble adv.

symblian (i) _to feast, carouse_, CP.

symel == symbel

symeringwyrt f. _violet_, WW 322^9.

syml = symbel I.

syml- = simbl-

symnenlic = semnendlic

syn = synn

sýn I. = sîen f. II. = sîn, sîen pres. pl. subj. of wesan (bêon). III. =
sîn I.

syn- v. also sin-, synn-.

synbend m. _bond of sin_, #Nic# 504^23.

synbôt f. _penance_, LL (316^31).

synbryne m? _burning ardour of sin_, MFH 143^18.

synbyrðen f. _burden of sin_.

synbysig _guilt-haunted_, B 2227.

synd = sind pres. pl. ind. of wesan (bêon).

+synd- = +sund-

synd¯æd f. _sinful deed_.

syndan = sendan

synder- = sundor-

synder¯æ (u^2) f. _special law_, DR 190^10.

synderlic (e) _singular, separate, special, peculiar, private_, Æ, CP:
_remote_. adv. -lîce. [sundor]

synderlicnes f. _separateness, separation, seclusion_, OEG:
_singularity_, GD 286^11.

synder-lîpe, -lýpe, -lýpig _peculiar, special_. adv. -lîpes (ý).

synderwurðmynt fmn. _special honour, prerogative_, WW 178^47.

+syndgian _to make to prosper_, BH 320^12.

syndig _skilled in swimming_, #Cra# 58.

syndir- = synder-

+syndl¯æcan (synt-) _to cause to prosper_, #RPs# 117^25.

syndolh n. _deadly wound_, B 817 (or = sin-?).

syndon = sindon pres. pl. ind. of wesan (bêon).

Syndonisc _Indian_, MF 173, MP 1·592. [_L. Gk._]

syndra? m., syndre? f. = sinder

±syndrian _to sunder, separate, divide_.

syndrig (i) _separate, single_: _'sundry,' various_, Æ: _special,
private, peculiar, exceptional, particular_, Æ, AO, CP:
_characteristic_: (distributive) _one each_. [sundor]

syndrige adv. _separately, specially, apart, alone_.

syndrigendlic _discretive_, #ÆGr# 229^7.

syndriglic _special, peculiar_. adv. -lîce _specially_: _separately_.

syndrung v. â-s.

syndur¯æ = synder¯æ

synew- = sinew-; and v. synu.  [[headword spelled "sinu"]]

synfâh _sin-stained_, #Cr# 1083.

±syngian _to sin, transgress_, Æ, CP.

syngrigendlic = syndrigendlic

syn-grin, -gryn f. _snare or mischief of sin, harm_.

syngung f. _transgression_, _HL_ 12^137. ['_sinning_']

synleahter m. _stain of sin_, W 134^24.

synlêas _'sinless,' guiltless, innocent_, _CP, Jn, W_.

synlêaw _sinful injury_, W 165^25.

synlic _sinful, foul, wicked_. adv. -lîce.

synn (e, i) f. (¶) _injury, mischief, enmity, feud_: _'sin,' guilt,
crime_, _Bl, Bo, Chr, VPs_; CP.

synn- see also syn-.

synnadæg (N) = sunnandæg

synnecge f. _female sinner_, MH 126^4.

synnes adv. _always_? #Kl#, but v. LL 455^4.

synnful _'sinful,' guilty, wicked, corrupt_, _Bl, LkL, VPs_; CP.

synngiend m. _sinner_, #EPs# 111^10.

+synnian _to commit adultery_, NG.

synnig _guilty, punishable, criminal_: _sinful_, CP.

synnlust m. _desire to sin_, Æ.

synoð = seonoð

synr¯æs m. _pressure of sin, temptation_, LL (284^9).

synrûst m. _canker of sin_, #Cr# 1321.

syn-sceaða, -scaða ¶ m. _sin-stained wretch, sinful outrager_.

synscyldig _wicked_, DD 168.

synt = sind pres. pl. ind. of wesan (bêon).

+synt- = +synd-

±synto f. _soundness, health_: _prosperity, welfare, salvation_.
[gesund]  [[listed as +sund]]

synwracu ¶ f. _punishment for sin_.

synwund f. _wound of sin_.

synwyrcende ¶ _sinning_.

sypan = sypian

sype m. _wetting, act of soaking through_, _Bo_. ['_sipe_']

sypian (i) _to absorb, drink in_, _Lcd_ 94b. ['_sipe_']

sýpian = sîpian

sypo, syppo = swipu

syrc m. = syric

syrce f. = syrice

syre = searwe, v. searo.

sýre = sîere

syredon = sier(w)edon pret. pl. of sierwan.

syretung f. _lurking place_, WW 440^6. [searu]

syrewrenc = searowrenc

syrewung = searwung

syrfe f. _service-tree_, EC 373. [_L._ sorbus]

syrftrêow n. _service-tree_, KC 3·379^20.

syric = serc

syrice = serce  [[under "serc"]]

sýring f. _sour milk, buttermilk_. [sûr]

syrode = sierwde pret. 3 sg. of sierwan.

syru == searo

syrwa = searwa gp. of searo.

syr-wan, -wian (Æ) = sierwan

Syrware mpl. _Syrians_.

syrwung = sierwung

syrwwrenc = searowrenc

syster = sester

sýð I. = sîð. II. v. sûð adv. III. pres. 3 sg. of sêoðan.

sýð- = sîð-

syðan = siððan

sýðerra (_BC, Lcd_) v. sûð. ['_souther_']

sýðst pres. 2 sg. of sêoðan.

syððan = siððan

sýwian = sêowian  [[under "sêowan"]]

syx = siex

syx- (AO) = siex-, six-




+T+


tâ I. f. '_toe_,' _Cp, LL, WW_. II. f. (Æ) = tân m.

tabele, tablu f., tabul m. = tabule

tabule f. '_table_,' _BH_: _a wooden hammer, or piece of wood struck as
a signal for assembling monks_, CM: _writing tablet_: _gaming table_:
_table of the law_. [_L._]

tacan^6 _to 'take,' seize_, _Chr_ 1072^5,6#d#.

+taccian _to tame, subdue_, GPH 402.

tâcen, tâcn n., nap. tâcen, tâcnu _'token,' symbol, sign, signal, mark,
indication, suggestion_, _B, BH, CP, Lcd, SPs_: _portent, marvel,
wonder, miracle_, _Bl_; Æ: _evidence, proof_: _standard, banner_.

tâcencircol m. _indiction_, TC 126^3.

tâcnan (Cp) = t¯æcnan

tâcnberend m. _standard-bearer_, #ÆGr# 27^15.

tâcnbora m. _standard-bearer_: _guide_.

±tâcnian _to mark, indicate_: _betoken, denote, signify, represent_,
_Bl, Bo_; CP: _portend_: _demonstrate, express_. ['_token_']

+tâcni(g)endlic _typical, emblematic_, ÆH 2·278^14; ÆP 122^17.

±tâcnung f. _sign, presage, token_, _Bo_: _manifestation, signification,
type_, _Bo, BH_: _indication, symptom, proof_: _dispensation_, AO 60^1.
['_tokening_']

tâcon, tâcun = tâcen

tâcor, tâcur m. _brother-in-law_, Æ.

tâde, tâdi(g)e f. '_toad_,' _WW_.

tæbere _a weaving tool_? _tenterhook_? WW 294^17.

tæcan _to transfer, translate_, Æ. [_ON._ taka]

±t¯æcan _to show, declare, demonstrate_, _Æ, AO, BH, LL, RB_: _'teach'
('i-tæche'), instruct, train_, _Æ, Bl, Bo, Lcd, LL_; CP: _prescribe,
direct_, _Æ, CP, WW_. +t. fram _dismiss_, LL 162[22].

t¯æcing f. _teaching, instruction_, Æ: _doctrine_: _direction,
injunction, command, rule_.

t¯æcnan _to mark by a token, denote, designate, mark out_. [_Ger._
zeichnen]

-t¯æcne v. earfoð-t.

t¯æcnend m. _indicator_, A 13·329.

t¯æcnian = tâcnian

t¯æcning f. _demonstration, proof_, #Bo# 90^1.

tæfel == tæfl

tæfl fn. _cube, die, game with dice or tables_. [_L._ tabula]

tæfl-an, -ian _to gamble_, #Gl#.

tæfle adj. _given to dice-playing_, #GnE# 185.

tæflere m. _gambler_.

tæflstân m. _gambling-stone, die_, #Gl#.

tæflung f. _gaming, playing at dice_.

t¯æg = têag

tægel, tægl (e) m. '_tail_,' _LL, WW_; Æ.

tæglh¯ær n. _hair of the tail_, #Lcd# 1·360^20.

tægðian (M) = teogoðian

tæherian (_NG_) = têarian

tæhher (NG) = têar

t¯æhte pret. 3 sg. of t¯æcan.

tæl (a, e) n. _number_.

t¯æl (â) f. _blame, reproach, calumny, abuse_, _CP, WW_: _blasphemy_.
['_tele_']

+tæl I. (e, ea) n., nap. +talu _number, series_, _Mt_; Æ: _number of
people, tribe_: _catalogue_, WW 418^36: _estimation, opinion_.
['_i-tel_'] II. adj. np. +tale _swift, ready_, #PPs# 56^5.

tæla = tela

±t¯ælan (ê) _to blame, censure, scold, reprove, reproach, accuse_, Æ, AO,
CP: _speak ill of, slander, insult, deride_, _Bo, LL, WW_: _dispute_.
['_tele_']

tælberend = telgberend

+tælcircul m. _cycle, series_, WW 204^42.

+tælcræft m. _arithmetic_, Æ (e).

+tæld = +teld

-t¯æle v. lêof-, un-t.  [[under "lêoft¯æl"]]

t¯ælend m. _slanderer, backbiter_: _mocker, scoffer_: _reprover_.

t¯ælende _censorious, slanderous_.

t¯ælere (ê) m. _derider, scoffer_, #KGl# 75^16.

+tælfæst _measurable_, #LPs# 38^6.

t¯ælful (â) _blameworthy_, NC 325.

tælg == telg

t¯ælhlehter m. _derision_, WW 172^4. [hleahtor]

tælian = talian

tælla (GPH 394) = telga

tællan = tellan

t¯ællêas _blameless_, CP. adv. -lîce, CP.

t¯ællic _blameworthy, slanderous, blasphemous_. adv. -lîce.

tælmearc f. _date, period_, #Gu# 849. [talu]

tælmet n. _measure, portion_, #An# 113. [talu]

t¯ælnes (ê) f. _blame, reproof_, CP: _slander, calumny, insult_.

+tælrîm n. _order, succession_, #Sol# 38.

±tælsum _in numbers, rhythmic_, OEG.

t¯ælung f. _reproof_, CP: _slander, derision_.

t¯ælweorð- = t¯ælwierð-

t¯æl-wierðe, -wierðlic _reprehensible, blameworthy_, CP. adv. -lîce.

t¯ælwierðlicnes (eo^2) f. _reprehensible conduct, blameableness_, CP
52^15.

+tælwîs _discreet, capable_, WW 207^40: _skilled in arithmetic_.

t¯ælwyrd-, t¯ælwyrð- = t¯ælwierð-

t¯æman = tîeman

tæmespîle f. _sieve-frame, sieve-stand_? _sieve-stake_? LL 455[17]. [ep.
temsian]

tæmian (GD 11^9) = temian

t¯ænel (ê^1, î^2) m. _wicker basket_, _Æ, WW_. ['_teanel_'; tân]

t¯ænen _made of twigs_, OEG. [tân]

tæng- = teng-

t¯ænil = t¯ænel

tæppa m. _'tap,' spigot_, _IM_.

tæppe f? _strip of stuff or cloth, 'tape,'_ _WW_ 107^33.

tæpp-ed, -et n. _figured cloth, tapestry, carpet_, _TC, WW_. ['_tapet_']

tæppelbred n. _footstool_, NG.

tæppere m. _tapster, tavern-keeper_, _Sc, WW_. ['_tapper_']

tæppestre f. _tapstress, female tavern-keeper_, _Æ_. ['_tapster_']

tæppet = tæpped

tæppian _to open (a cask)_? _furnish it with a tap or spout_? _IM_ 125.
['_tap_']

tæppilbred = tæppelbred

tær pret. 3 sg. of teran.

t¯ær = têar

t¯æsan (±) _to pull, tear, comb, card_, _Lcd_: (¶) _wound, injure,
assault_. ['_tease_']

±t¯æse _pleasant_, _Met_: _convenient, suitable_, _B_. ['_i-tase_']

+t¯æse n. _advantage, convenience_: _pleasure_, CP 387: _useful thing,
implement_.

+t¯æsed _soothed_? CP 297^18.

t¯æsel f. _'teasel' (plant)_, _Lcd_ 1·282^15.

+t¯æslic _convenient_. adv. -lîce _conveniently_: _gently, softly,
smoothly_, CP.

tæslîce (NG) = ðæslîce

+t¯æsnes f. _convenience_, WW.

t¯æsu = teosu

t¯ætan _to caress_, #Wy# 4. [tât?]

tætteca m? _rag, tatter, shred_? Æ.

t¯æð = têð, v. tôð.

-t¯æwe (êo) v. æl-t.

tagantes helde f. _'artemisia' (plant)_. WW 296^20.

tâh pret. 3 sg. of têon II.

tâhe (#Gl#) = tâ

tâhspura m. _spur, tip of toe_? WW 197^14.

tâhte = t¯æhte pret. 3 sg. of t¯æcan.

tal (N) = talu

tâl == t¯æl

tala = tela

tald = teald pp. of tellan.

+tale v. tæl.

talente f. _'talent' (money of account)_, _AO_. [_L._]

talian (æ) (= tellan) _to count, calculate, reckon, account, consider,
think, esteem, value_, CP: _argue_, CP: _tell, relate_, Æ: _impute_, Æ.

+talscipe m. _multitude_, NG.

talt- = tealt-

talu f. _'tale,' series, calculation_: _telling, relation,
communication, narrative_, _Æ, KC_: _fable, tale, story_: _accusation_.

+talu v. +tæl.

tâlwyrð- = t¯ælwierð-

tam '_tame_,' _Æ, Bo, WW_: _tractable, gentle, mild_, _Bo, Gn_.

tama m. _tameness_, #Bo, Met#.

tamcian _to tame, soothe_, NC 326.

-tamcol v. un-t.  [[headword spelled "untamcul"]]

tân I. m. _twig, rod, switch, branch_: _rod of divination_. II.
_shooting_? _spreading_? #Gen# 2360. III. pl. of tâ.

tânede _having a disease of the toes_? WW 161^28.

±tang, tange (o) f. (sg. and pl.) _pincers, 'tongs,' forceps_, _Æ, BH,
Cp, WW_; Æ.

+tang (w. d.) _in contact with_ (= pret. 3 sg. of +tingan).

+tanglîce _together_, RB 47^15.

tânhlyta m. _soothsayer, augur, diviner_, WW 189^3. [tân, hlot]

tânhlytere m. _soothsayer, diviner_, WW 183^32.

+tanned _tanned_, _WW_ 118^7. ['_tan_']

tannere m. '_tanner_,' _KC_ 2·411.

taper (_Lcd, WW_) = tapor

taperæx f. _small axe_, #Chr# 1031#a#; CC 28^16. [_ON._ taparöx]

tapor (ea^1; e^2, u^2) m. _lamp-wick, 'taper,' candle_, _CP_: _a feeble
light_, #Ph# 114. [_Celtic?_]

taporberend m. _acolyte_, #Gl#.

taran v. teoru.

targa? m., targe? f. _small shield, buckler_, _KC_. [v. '_targe_']

+targed _furnished with a shield_, OEG 2259.

taru f. _tear, rent_. [teran]

tasol, tasul (#Gl#) = teosel

tât _soft, tender, joyous_, Leo 806^12.  [[from first edition]]

-tâwere v. flæsc-t.  [[headword spelled "fl¯æsctâwere"]]

±tâwian _to prepare, make ready, make_: _till, cultivate_, _BH_:
_harass, afflict, insult_, _Æ, AO_. t. tô bysmore _outrage, profane_,
_Æ, W_. ['_taw_']

te- = tô-

têa (NG) = tîen

+têad (ê) pp. of +têon.

têafor I. n. _red, red lead, vermilion, purple_, _WW_. [v. '_tiver_']
II. or ? têaforgêap (v. GK), meaning doubtful, #Ruin# 31.

têag (¯æ, ê) f. _cord, band, thong, fetter_, _Cr, WW_ (ê): _case, chest_:
_enclosure_. ['_tie_']

têagan = têogan, têon

têagor (#Gu#) = têar

têah I. pret. 3 sg. of têon I. and II. II. = têag

teal- = tal-, tæl-, tel-

têal- = t¯æl-

+teald = +teld

tealde pret. 3 sg. of tellan

tealgor = telgor

tealt _unstable, precarious_, _Run, W_. ['_tealt_']

tealtian, tealtrian (a) _to totter, shake, stumble, waver_: _be
untrustworthy_: _amble_. [cp. _Ger._ zelter]

têam (ê) m. _descendant, family, race, line_, _Æ, Mk, TC_:
_child-bearing_, _Æ_: _company, band_, _Æ_: _'team' (of horses, oxen,
etc.)_, _WW_: _vouching to warranty, right of jurisdiction in matters of
warranty_, _EC_ (ê), _LL_.

+têama (ý) m. _warrantor, surety_, LL.

têaman = tîeman

têamful _fruitful_, _LPs, WW_. [v. '_teemfull_']

têamian = tîeman

têampôl m. _breeding pool_, EC 322´.

têan- (A) = têon-

teaper (K) = tapor

têapor (_Lcd_) = têafor

têar m. _drop_, _Cr, Lcd_: '_tear_,' _B, Bl_; CP: _what is distilled
from anything in drops, 'nectar,'_ _WW_; CM.

tearflian _to turn, roll, wallow_, Mk 9^20.

têargêotende _tear-shedding, tearful_, #Nic# 508^15.

têarian (t¯æherian, ê^1) _to weep_, _JnL_. ['_tear_']

têarig, têarlic _tearful_.

têarighlêor _with tearful cheeks_, #Gen# 2274.

tearn (WW 286^7) = stearn

tearos v. teoru.

teart _sharp, rough, severe_, _Æ, OEG_. ['_tart_'; tær, pret. of teran]

teartlic _sharp, rough_, Æ. adv. -lîce, _OEG_. ['_tartly_']

teartnes f. _sharpness, roughness, hardness_, _OEG_; Æ. ['_tartness_']

teartnumol _biting, effectual_, #Lcd# 1·152^3.

teaslîce (NG) = ðæslîce

têað = têoð, pres. pl. of têon I. and II.

tebl = tæfl

tebl-, tebil- = tæfl-

têc- = t¯æc-

+têd = +têad

têde pret. of (?)*tên _to grow rough_. [tôh]

têder == týder  [[under "tîder"]]

têdr- = týdr-

tefel, tefil = tæfl

têfrung = tîfrung

têg = têag

têgan (M) = tîegan

têge = tîge  [[form of "tîgan" under 'tîegan'?]]

tegl = tægl  [[under "tægel"]]

têgð- = têoð-

têh = têah pret. 3 sg. of têon.

teherian (A) = têarian

tehher, teher (_NG_) = têar

têhton = t¯æhton pret. pl. of t¯æcan.

teiss (N) = t¯æsu

+tel == +tæl

têl- = t¯æl-

tela (i, ea, eo) I. adv. _well, fitly, properly, rightly, very, good_,
CP: _prosperously, beneficially_. II. interj. _well! good!_

±teld n. _tent, tabernacle_, _Æ, BH, TC_. ['_teld_']

+teldgehlîwung f. _tabernacle_, A 8·308^34.

teldian _to spread (net)_, _set (trap)_, _Cp, PPs_. ['_teld_']

teldsticca m. _tent-peg_, Æ.

+teldung f. _tabernacle_, #EPs# 18^5; 77^60.

+teldwurðung f. _feast of tabernacles_, WW 107^17.

teldwyrhta m. _tent-maker_, Æ.

telede = tealde pret. 3 sg. of tellan.

+telfers nm. _catalectic verse_, OEG.

telg (æ) m. _dye, colour, tincture_.

telga m. _twig, branch, bough, shoot_, CP: _pole, stock_, EC 95´.

+telg-an, -ian _to dye_, WW.

telgberend _yielding a dye_, WW 462^19.

telgestre (æ^1) m. _dyer_, GD 342^3.

telgian I. _to put forth branches_, #Rim# 34. II. = talian. III. =
telgan

telgor mf., telgra m., telgre f. _twig, branch, shoot_, _Æ, Lcd_.
[v. '_tille_']

telgung f. _dye, purple dye_, WW.

telian = tilian

±tellan (æ, ea) _to 'tell' ('i-telle'), reckon, number, compute,
calculate_, _Æ, Bl, Lk_: _account, estimate, consider, think, esteem,
believe_, _CP, Mt_: _charge against, impute to_: _state, recount,
enumerate, announce, relate_, _Æ, Bo, Chr_. t. gelîc _compare_. [talu]

-tellendlic v. un-t.

teltrê, teltrêo n. _weaving-tool_? _tenterhook_? _tent-peg_? WW.

têm = têam

tema = tama

têman = tîeman

têmbyrst m. _failure to secure a voucher_, EC 202. [têam]

Temes, Temese f. _river Thames_, AO. [_L._ Tamisia]

±temesian _to sift_, _MkL_ (i^2). ['_temse_']

±temian _to tame, subdue_, Æ, CP: (+) _suffer, permit_, ÆL 23^810.

tempel, templ n. '_temple_,' _Æ, Bl, CP, G, VPs_. [_L._ templum]

tempel- = templ-

tempelgeat n. _temple-door_, W 49^25.

templgeweorc n. _structure of the temple_, W 277^25.

templhâlgung f. _dedication of the temple_, OEG 40^36.

templic adj. _of a temple_, OEG.

±temprian v. _to 'temper,' moderate_, _Æ, Sc_: _cure, heal_, _Æ_:
_control, curb_, _Æ_ (refl.), _Lcd, Sc_. [_Lat._]

temprung f. _tempering, moderation_.

tên (#VPs#) == tîen

tênan = týnan, têonan

-tendan (y) v. â-, for-, on-t.

tender = tynder

tend-ing, -ling f. _burning, stinging_, _NC, GD_. ['_tinding_']

têne = tîen

tênel (_Ep_) = t¯ænel

±tengan (æ) _to press towards, hurry, hasten_, Æ. âweg t. _get away, get
off_. +t. on _assail_, AO.

+tenge _near to, resting on_: _oppressing, burdensome_, AO.

tênil = t¯ænel

tennan _to lure, coax_? #Wy# 4?

têo pres. 1 sg. of têon I. and II.

teochian = teohhian

têode pret. of têon III., têogan, teohhian.

teofenian ¶ _to join, put together_.

têofor = têafor

têofrian = tîfrian

têogan (_OHG._ gizehôn) = teohhian

teogeða, teogoða = têoða

teogoðian _to 'tithe,' grant or pay tithes_, _CP_; _divide by ten_, Æ.

teoh fm., gds. teohhe _race_: _band, troop, company, society_. [_Ger._
zeche]

têoh imperat. of têon.

+têoh n. _matter, material, universe_? #Rim# 2.

teohhe v. teoh.

±teohhian _to determine, intend, propose_, Æ: _consider, think, judge,
estimate_.

+teohhung f. _arrangement, ordering_, HL 13^69.

teohian = teohhian

teol- = tel-, til-

teolðyrl n. '_foramen_,' '_fenestra_,' OEG.

teom (MtR 21^5) = tam

têon I. (±) sv^2 _to pull, tug, draw, drag, row (boat)_, _BH, CP, LL_:
_withdraw, take_, LL 356,70: _entice, allure, induce, lead, bring_, _BH,
Bl, Bo, Gu_; CP: _bring up, educate_, _Æ, Chr_: _arrogate_, CP: _bring
forth, produce_, _Æ_: _restrain_, LL: _betake oneself to, go, roam_,
_Bo_: (+) _string up, play (instrument)_. +togen _lengthened, long
(of vowels)_, #ÆGr# 49^14. ['_tee_,' '_i-teon_'; *teohan] II. sv^1 (but
forms belonging to têon I. often found) _accuse, censure_, _Æ, LL_; AO.
['_tee_'; *tîhan] III. (±) _to prepare, furnish forth, arrange, adorn,
deck_: _produce, work, create, make_, Æ: _fix, establish, constitute,
ordain_. [= teohhian] IV. num. = tîen. V. n. = têona. VI. = dêon
(v. JAW 19)

têona m. _injury, hurt, wrong_, _Bl, Mt_; AO: _accusation, reproach,
insult, contumely_, Æ, AO, CP: _anger, grief_: _malice_, Æ: _enmity,
hostility_. ['_teen_']

têonan (ý) _to injure, irritate, vex, trouble, grieve_: _slander,
insult_.

têoncwide m. _hurtful speech_: _blasphemy_.

têoncwidian _to slander, calumniate_, #Gl#.

têond I. m. _accuser_, LL. II. _drawer_, BH 288^14.

têone f. = têona

têonere m. _slanderer_, #LPs# 71^4.

têonful _slanderous, evil, rebellious, painful_, _SPs, W_; Æ.
['_teenful_']

têonhete ¶ m. _malicious hate_.

têonian (ý) _injure, irritate_, _LPs_: _slander_. ['_teen_']

têonlêas _free from suffering_, MF 174.

têonlêg ¶ m. _destroying flame_.

têonlic _destructive, shameful, hurtful_. adv. -lîce.

têonr¯æden (e^2) f. _abuse, wrong, injury, humiliation_, Æ.

têonsmið m. _evil-doer_, #Gu# 176.

têontig = hundtêontig

têonword n. _reproach, abuse, calumny_.

±têorian _to fail, cease, become weary, be tired, exhausted_, _Cp, Lcd,
LL, WW_: _'tire,' weary, exhaust_, _PPs_. [teran]

+têorigendlic _failing, defective_, #Sc# 181^4.

teoro = teoru

+têorodnes f. _debility, weariness_.

teors m. '_calamus_,' '_veretrum_,' _Lcd, WW_. ['_tarse_']

teoru (e) n., occl. gs. tearos and wk. a. taran _'tar,' bitumen,
distillation from a tree, resin, gum, balsam_, _Cp, Lcd_: _wax from the
ear_.

±têorung f. _exhaustion, weariness_, Æ.

teosel (a, e) m. _die ('tessera')_. [_L._]

teosu (æ, e) f. _harm, injury, ruin_.

teosuspr¯æc f. _harmful speech_, #PPs# 139^11.

teosuword (teso-) n. _calumny, harmful speech_.

teoswian (e) _to injure, harm_, #Sol# 94.

têoð pres. pl. of têon I. and II.

têoða (ê) '_tenth_,' _Æ, AO, Chr_. têoðan d¯æl _tenth part, 'tithe.'_
[teogeða

têoðe _tenthly_, LL 181[10].

±têoðian _to divide by ten, tithe_, Æ: _take a tenth_: _give
tithes_, CP.

têoðing = têoðung

têoðingdæg m. _tithing day, tenth day_.

têoðingealdor m. _ruler over ten, dean, captain of ten_.

têoðingmann m. _'tithing-man,' headborough_, _LL_: _captain of ten_,
_Æ_.

têoðung f. _division into ten, decimation, tenth part, tithe,
'tithing,'_ _Æ, Lk, LL_: _band of ten men_, _LL_.

têoðungcêap m. _tithe_, #Bl# 39^11.

têoðunggeorn _diligent in paying tithes_, A 12·518^26.

têoðungland n. _land set apart for tithes_, LL 2·750.

têoðungsceatt m. _tithing-money, tithes_.

têowlic = tôwlic  [[headword spelled "towlic"]]

teped (_KGl_), tepet = tæpped

têr (_Lcd_) = têar

+ter n. _tearing, laceration_: _thing torn_: _tumult, discord_.

±teran^4 (ea, eo) _to tear, lacerate_, _Bo, Jud, LL, Sc_.

terdnes (A 13·34) = teartnes

tergan = tirgan

termen m. _term, end_. [_L._ terminus]

tero, teru (_Ep, WW_) = teoru

tes- = teos-

+têse = +t¯æse

teter m. _tetter, skin eruption, eczema, ringworm_, #Gl#, CP.

teterwert f. _celandine_. [wyrt]

teting = tyhtung  [[variant of "tyhting"?]]

têð v. tôð.

têða = têoða

-tewestre v. wull-t.

Tî = Tîw

tîan (N) = têon III.

tîber n. _offering, sacrifice, victim_.

tîbernes f. _sacrificing, destruction_, AO 50^18.

ticcen (y) n. _kid_, _Æ_ (y), _MtL_. ['_ticchen_']

ticgen (NG) = ticcen

ticgende _proudly adorned_, OEG.

ticia m. _'tick' (insect)_, _Gl_.

tictator m. _dictator_, AO 70^3. [_L._]

tîd f. _time, period, season, while_, _Æ, AO, B, BH, G_. on tîde _at the
proper time_: _hour_, _Æ, Chr_: _feast-day, festal-tide_, _Chr, MH_:
_canonical hour or service_, _LL, WW_. ['_tide_']

tîdan (±) _to betide, happen_, _Bo, LL_: _fall to (one's lot)_, _BC_.
['_tide_,' '_i-tide_']

tîdanðênung = tîdðênung

tidd- = tîd-, týd-

tîdd¯æg ¶ m. _lifetime_.

tîdelîce = tîdlîce

tîdembwlâtend = tîdymbwlâtend

tîder, tîdre (ê, îe, ý) _weak, frail, infirm, faint-hearted_:
_fleeting_.

tîderlic (ê, îe) _weak_, CP.

tîdernes (ê, îe) f. _frailty (of body or soul)_.

tîdfara m. _one who travels at his own convenience_? #Cr# 1674 (or ? two
words).

tîdgenge _having a monthly course, periodical_, GPH 392.

tîdlic _timely, seasonable, opportune_, AO: _temporal_: _temporary_.
adv. -lîce.

tîdlicnes f. _opportunity, fit time_, NG.

tîdran = týdran

tîdrên m. _timely rain_, Æ.

±tîdrian (ý) _to become feeble, weak_: _decay_.

tîdsang mn. _hour-services, canonical hours, lauds_, Æ.

tîdscêawere m. _astrologer_, WW 176^4.

tîdscriptor m. _chronographer, chronicler_, WW 204^17 (hybrid word).

tîdðênung f. _service at one of the canonical hours_, FBO.

tîdum adv. _at times, occasionally_.

tîdung f. (usu. pl.) _event, tidings, news_, _Chr_. ['_tiding_']

tîdwrîtere m. _chronicler_, #Gl#.

tîdwurdung f. _service at one of the canonical hours_, HL 11^67.

tîdymbwlâtend (e^2) m. _astrologer_, #Lcd#.

tîeder- = tîder-

tîedran = týdran

±tîegan (ê, î, ý) _to 'tie,' bind_, _Æ, CP_: _join, connect_, _ÆGr_.
[têag]

tiegle = tigle

tieht- = tyht-

tîehð pres. 3 sg. of têon I. and II.

tiel- = til-

tîema = tîma

tîeman (¯æ, ê, î, ý) _to bring forth, engender, beget, propagate_, _Æ,
W_: _make answerable for another person, call as witness_, _Æ_: _vouch
to warranty_, _LL_. ['_teem_'; têam]

+tîeme I. (ê, ý) _suitable_. II. (ý) _team, yoke_, Æ.

tîen (ê, î, ý) num. '_ten_,' _CP_.

tîenambre _holding ten ambers_, #Lcd# 32b(ý).

tîenbebod (ê) n. _decalogue_, OEG 11^108.

tîenfeald (ý) _tenfold_.

tîengewintred (ý) _ten years old_, LL 19[27#h#].

tîenhund (ê) _thousand_.

tîennihte (ý) _ten days old_, ANS 129·22.

tîenstrenge (ê, î) _ten-stringed_, #VPs#.

tîenwintre _ten years old_, Æ (ý).

tîer _heap_? (GK), _drop_? (Sedgef.), #Met# 20^81?

tife f. _bitch_, #Lcd# 64a.

tîfer = tîber

tîfrian (êo, ý) _to paint, depict, figure_. [têafor]

tîfrung (ê) f. _picture_, AS 20^15.

-tîg (ê, ý) v. fore-, forð-t.

Tîg = Tîw

tîgan = tîegan

tige == tyge

tigel, tigele f. _earthen vessel, crock, pot, potsherd_: _'tile,'
brick_, _AO_; Mdf: _slabs for roofing_, _Cp, Lcd, VPs_.

tigelærne f. _tile kiln_? _house of brick_? KC 3·130^29.

tigelen _made of pot, earthenware_, #SPs# 2^9.

tigelfâg _tile-adorned_, #An# 842.

tigelgeweorc n. _brick-making_, Æ.

tigellêah m. brick-field, KC 5·267^21.

tigelstân m. _tile_, ES 11·66. ['_tilestone_']

tigelwyrhta (y) m. _brick-maker, potter_.

tigen pp. of têon II.

tiger pl. tigras '_tiger_,' _Æ, Nar_.

tiggan = tîegan

tîging f. _tie, connection_, #ÆGr# 14^14. [tîgan]

tigl = (1) tigel; (2) tygel

tigle f. _'muraenula,' sea-mullet_? WW 180^30.

tigle = tigel

tigol(e) = tigele  [[under "tigel"]]

tigolgetel n. _tale of bricks_, Æ (#Ex# 5^18).

tigon pret. pl. of têon II.

tîgrisc _of a tiger_, A 4·161.

tigðian (AO) = tîðian

-tîgu v. egeðgetîgu. [egðe]

tigule = tigele  [[under "tigel"]]

tihian = teohhian

tiht == tyht

tîhð pres. 3 sg. of têon II.

til I. _good, apt, suitable, useful, profitable_: _excellent_: _brave_:
_abounding_. II. ¶ n. _goodness, fitness_. III. n. = till. IV. (N) prep.
_to_, _MtL, OET_. ['_till_']

tila = tela

tilen f. _endeavour_, GD 194^12.

tilfremmende _well-doing_, #Rd# 60^7.

tilgan = tilian

tili (OET) = twilic

tilia, tilig(e)a (y) m. _tiller, workman, hand, labourer, farmer,
husbandman_, _Mt_; Æ. ['_tilie_']

tilian (eo, y) _to aim at, aspire to, strive after, try, endeavour_, _Æ,
Bl_; CP: (±) _procure, obtain, gain, provide_, _Æ, Chr, PPs_: _exert
oneself, work, make, generate_, _Æ, CP_: _tend, cherish, cultivate,
'till,' plough_, _CP, Chr, Lcd, LL_: _trade, traffic_, Æ: (±) _treat,
cure_.

tiligea = tilia

tiling = tilung

till ¶ n. _station, standing-place_.

till- = til-

+tillan _to touch, attain_, Æ.

tillic ¶ adj. _fit, good_. adv. -lîce.

tilmôdig ¶ _well-disposed, kind, good_.

tilð, tilðe (y) f. _'tilth,' labour, husbandry_, _W_: _crop, harvest_,
_A_: _gain, profit_, OEG.

tilung (eo, ie, io, y) f. _acquisition, procuring_: _care, solicitude_:
_occupation, work, performance_, CP: _tending, culture, husbandry_, Æ:
_produce, gain, income_, Æ.

tîma m. _'time,' period, space of time_, _Æ, AO_: _fixed time_, _CP, G,
WW_: _favourable time, opportunity_, _CP_: _a metrical unit_, _A_.

tîman = tîeman

±timber n. _'timber,' building material_, _LL_: _act of building_:
_building, structure_, _BH, Lcd, MtL, VPs_: _trees, woods_, _AO_.
[v. Mdf]

timbergeweorc n. _cutting timber_, BC 1·344^9.

+timberhâlgung f. _consecration of a building_, OEG 56^287.

timberhrycg m. _wooded ridge_? KC.

timberland n. _land given for repairing and maintaining buildings_.

timbor = timber

±timbran, timbrian _to build, construct, erect, effect, do_, _AO, CP,
PPs_; Æ: _edify, instruct_: _cut 'timber.'_

+timbre n. _building, structure_, Æ, AO.

timbrend mf. _builder_.

timbrung f. _act of building_, Æ: _structure_: _edification_.

+tîmian (ý) _to happen, fall out_, Æ.

tîmlic adj. _temporal, earthly_. adv. -lîce _quickly, soon, early_, Æ.

timpane f. _timbrel_. [_L._]

timpestre f. _female timbrel-player_, #LPs# 67^26.

timple f. _a weaver's instrument_, LL 455[15,1].

tin I. n. '_tin_,' _CP_. II. f. _beam, rafter_, #Gl#. III. = tinen

tîn num. = tîen

tinclian _to tickle_, #Sc#.

+tinclic = +tingelic  [[form of "tynge"?]]

tind m. _spike, beak, prong, tooth of a fork_, _Cp, Ep, Sol_. ['_tine_']

tindig _spiked_, WW 116^12.

tindiht _forked, jagged, beaked_.

tindre = tyndre

tinen _made of tin_, _ÆGr_. ['_tinnen_']

+ting = +tyng  [[form of "tynge"?]]

tinge = tynge

+tingan^3 _to press against_, #An# 138.

+tingcræft m. _mechanics_, #HGl# 479.

-tîning v. gafol-t.

tinn _beam_, A 19·491.

tinnan _to stretch_, #Gl#: _desire, long for_? _burn_? #Rim# 54.

tinnen = tinen

tînstrenge = tîenstrenge

tinterg == tintreg

tinterðegn = tintregðegn

tintreg (_AO_; Æ) n., _tintrega_ m. _torture, torment, punishment_, _AO,
Lk, W_. ['_tintregh_']

tintreganlic = tintreglic

tintregian _to torment, afflict, torture, punish_, Æ, AO.

tintreglic _full of torment, infernal_, BH 346^12.

tintregstôw f. _place of torment_, #Guth# 38^4.

tintregðegn m. _torturer, executioner_.

tintregung f. _torture, punishment_, Æ.

tintrian (AO) = tintregian

tio- = teo-

tiol- = tel-, til-

tîr (ý) m. (¶) _fame, glory, honour, ornament_: _name of the rune for
=t=_: _name of a planet and a god (Mars)_, #Run# 17.

tîrêadig ¶ _glorious, famous_.

tîrfæst ¶ _glorious, famous_.

tîrfruma m. _prince of glory_, #Cr# 206.

tirgan (e, y) _to worry, exasperate, pain, provoke, excite_, _Gu_.
['_tar_']

tîrgîng (y) f. _'zelus,' provocation_, #BlPs#.

tîrlêas _inglorious, infamous_, B 843.

tîrmeahtig ¶ _of glorious might_.

tirð pres. 3 sg. of teran.

tîrwine m. _(famous) follower, retainer_, #Met# 25^21.

tit, tite = titt

tîtelian _to indicate by a written mark, entitle, ascribe_, Æ. [_L._
titulus]

tîtelung f. _'recapitulatio,' a giving of titles or headings_, OEG 1153.

titolose _'tidulosa' (plant)_, OEG 56^425.

titt m. _'teat,' nipple, breast_, _Lcd, LkLR_.

tittstrycel m. _teat_, WW 158^44.

tîtul m. _'title,' superscription_, MkL 15^26. [_L._ titulus]

tîð I. f. _assent, permission_: _giving, grant, boon, favour,
concession_, _Æ, BH_ (tigð). tîðe fremian _to grant_. ['_tithe_'] II.
pres. 3 sg. of têon I. and II.

tîða m., tîðe f. (only in phr. t. bêon, weorðan) _sharer in, receiver,
grantee_, _BH, Mt_. ['_tithe_']

±tîðian (often w. g. thing and d. pers.) _to give, bestow, grant,
permit_, _Æ, AO, BH_. ['_tithe_']

tîðing = têoðung

+tîung f. _preparation_, Cp 684#a#.

tîurung = têorung

Tîw _Tiw (northern god of war)_, _Mars_: _name of the rune for =t=_.

tîwesdæg m. '_Tuesday_,' _A_; RB.

tîwesniht f. _Monday night_, #Lcd#.

tô I. prep. +a+ (w. d.) (motion) _'to,' into_. tô emnes _abreast of_:
(rest) _at_: (figurative direction, object of verb) _conducing to, to_.
fôn tô rîce _to ascend the throne_: (definition, destination) _for, as
a_. wyrcan tô wîte _to contrive as a punishment_: _in accordance with,
according to_: (time) _at_. tô midre niht _at midnight_. tô dæg
_to-day_. tô langum fyrste _for a long time_: (with gerunds) _to express
purpose, etc._ +b+ (w. g.) (of time) _at_. II. adv. _besides, also_,
_Bo_: _'too,' excessively_, _Bl, Cr_: _thereto_: _towards, in the
direction of_: _in addition, besides_. adverbial phrases;--tô ðâm
(ð¯æm), tô ðæs (1) _so_ (adeo), _to such an extent_. (2) _to that end_.
(3) _moreover, however_. tô hwæs _whither_. tô ðâm ðæt, tô ðý ðæt _in
order that_. tô ðon ðæt _until_. tô ðæs ðe _when, where_. tô hwon, tô
hwý _for what, wherefore_. tô sôðum _truly_. tô ðearfe _according to
what is needed_. ð¯ær tô êacan _in addition thereto_. ne tô wuhte _by
no means_. tô him _next or nearest to him_.

tô- prefix I. with accent (stress) it has the meaning of adv. tô (as in
tôcweðan, tôbringan, tôcuman). [_Ger._ zu-] II. without accent =
_asunder_ (as in tôbrecan). [_Ger._ zer-]

tôætýcan (ê^3) _to add to, increase_, BH 112^1. [êac]

tôætýcnes f. _increase_, BH 2·242.

tôâmearcian to mark out, assign, #Sc# 29^5.

tôâspanan^7 _to entice to one, allure_.

tôâwylian _to roll to, roll_.

tôb¯ædan _to elevate, exalt_.

tôbêatan^7 _to beat severely, destroy by beating_, _AO_. ['_tobeat_']

tôbecuman^4 _to come to, approach_.

tôbefealdan^7 _to fold together_, WW 343^10.

tôbeflôwan^7 _to flow round or up to_.

tôbegietan^5 _acquire, purchase_, EHy 4^16.

tôbelimpan^3 (impers.) _it belongs, behoves_, #Bl# 49^1.

tôbêotian _to threaten_, BH.

tôberan^4 _to remove, carry off, purloin_, _Æ, Bl_: _scatter, dissipate,
distract, destroy_: _swell_, CP: _separate_. ['_tobear_']

tôberennes f. _difference_, WW 390^27.

tôberstan^3 (intr.) _to burst apart, go to pieces_, _Æ, AO_: (tr.)
_cause to burst apart, shatter_, _Æ_. ['_toburst_']

tôberstung f. _bursting_, #Lcd# 74a.

tôbîgend _bowing down, tottering_, WW 386^30.

tôbl¯ædd v. tôblâwan.

tôblâwan^7 (but with rare wk. pp. tôbl¯ædd) _to blow to pieces, blast,
scatter_, Æ: _puff up, inflate, distend_, _Æ, Lcd_. ['_toblow_']

tôblâwennes f. _inflation_, Æ.

tôbodian _to announce_.

tôborstennes f. _abscess_, #Lcd# 1·322^22.

tôbr¯ædan _to spread abroad, disperse, scatter_, _Bo_; AO, CP: _spread
out, extend_, _Mt_; Æ: _open, dilate_: _multiply_. ['_tobrede_']

tô-br¯ædednes, -br¯ædnes f. _broadness, breadth_, #Ps#.

tôbrecan^4 _to break in pieces, break up, shatter, destroy, ruin, wreck,
overthrow, annul_, _Æ, Bo, Lcd_; AO, CP: _break through, violate,
force_, Æ, AO: _interrupt_. ['_tobreak_']

tôbrêdan I. = tôbregdan. II. = tôbr¯ædan

tôbregdan^3 _tear in pieces, wrench apart, rend, lacerate_, _AO, MtR_:
_cast off, shake off_: _turn to, turn about_. sl¯æpe tôb. _awake, wake
up_. ['_tobraid_']

tôbrengnes f. _oblation, offering_, #EPs# 39^7.

tôbrittian = tôbrýtan

tôbrocenlic _brittle, fragile_, W 263^13.

tôbrýs-an, -ian _to bruise, shatter, break to pieces_, _Mt_; Æ.
['_tobruise_']

tôbrýtan _to break in pieces, destroy_, _Æ_: _be repentant_.
['_tobryt_']

tôbrýtednes f. _contrition, sorrow_, #LPs#.

tôbrýtendlic _brittle, fragile_, WW 242^12.

tôbryting f. _crushing, contrition_, #Sc# 82^12.

tôbryttian = tôbrýtan

tôc pret. 3 sg. of tacan.

tôceorfan^3 _to cut, cut to pieces, cut off, cut away_, _Æ, MkL_.
['_tocarve_']

tôcêowan^2 _to bite to pieces, chew, eat_, _Æ_. ['_tochew_']

tôch = tôh

tôcime = tôcyme

tôcînan^1 _to split open, cleave asunder, splinter, crack_, _Cp, Lcd_;
Æ. ['_tochine_']

tôcirhûs n. _lodging-house, inn_, WW 147^25.

tôcl¯æfan _to split, cleave_, OEG 18b^38.

tôclêofan^2 _to cleave asunder, split, divide_, _Bo_; Æ. ['_tocleave_']

tôcleofian = tôclifian

tôcleopian = tôclypian

tôclifian _to cleave to, adhere, stick to_, #BPs#.

tôclifrian _to be torn in pieces, scratched about_, Æ.

tôclip- = tôclyp-

tôclypian _to call to, invoke_.

tôclypigendlic _vocative_, #ÆGr#.

tôclypung f. _calling upon, invocation_, Æ.

tôcnâwan^7 _to know, acknowledge, recognize, distinguish, discern_,
Æ, CP.

tôcnâw(en)nes f. _understanding, discernment_, ÆH 2·362^32; GD 311^11.

tôcnyssan _to shake_, RB 121^6.

tôcuman^4 _to come, arrive_, CP.

tôcwæs-cednes (#RPs# 105^30), -tednes (#SPs#) f. _trembling, shaking_.

tôcweðan^5 _forbid, interdict, prohibit_, Æ.

tôcwîsan = tôcwýsan

tôcwylman _to torment_, HL 12^56.

tôcwýsan _to crush utterly, grind to pieces, bruise, destroy_: _be
crushed_, Æ.

tôcwýsednes f. _crushed condition_, Æ: _contrition_, GD 125^11.

tôcyme m. _coming, advent, arrival_, _Æ, Bl, CP_. ['_tocome_']

tôcyrcanwerd _towards church_, ÆL 31^902.

tôcyrran (intr.) _to part, separate_, #Chr#.

tôdæg, tôdæge adv. _to-day_, Æ, AO, CP.

tôd¯æl = tôdâl

tôd¯ælan (ê) tr. and intr. _to divide, separate, scatter, disperse_, _Æ,
AO, Bo, Chr, W_: _dismember, cut off, destroy_: _distribute_, Æ:
_discriminate, distinguish_: _be divided_. ['_todeal_']

tôd¯æledlîce adv. _separately, distinctly, diversely_, #ÆGr#.

tôd¯ælednes f. _division_: _severance, separation_: _intermission,
respite, cessation_, Æ.

tôd¯ælendlic _separable, distinct_. adv. -lîce.

tôd¯ælnes f. _division, separation_, CP.

tôdâl n. _partition, division, separation_, Æ: _difference, distinction,
discretion_, Æ: _dispersion_: _'comma,' dividing point, clause, section,
period_.

tôdêlan (#KGl#) = tôd¯ælan

tôdêman _to decide, judge, sentence, determine_.

tôdihtnian _to dispose, arrange_, #BlPs# 82^6.

tôdôn anv. _to apply, put to, add_, #Lcd#: _divide, separate,
distinguish_, _Hex, LL_: _undo, open, unbind_, _PPs_. ['_todo_']

tôdr¯æfan _to scatter, disperse, separate, drive out or apart_, _BH, Mt_;
Æ. ['_todreve_']

tô-dr¯æfednes (Æ), -dr¯æfnes f. _dispersion, scattering_.

tôdrêfan _to disturb, bring into confusion, trouble_. [drôf]

tôdrêosan^2 _to be destroyed, perish, decay_, _MH_. ['_todrese_']

tôdrîfan^1 _to scatter, disperse, drive away_, _B, JnL_; Æ: _destroy,
repel_. ['_todrive_']

tôdw¯æscan ¶ _to put out, extinguish_.

tôêacan prep. and adv. _besides, moreover, also_, Æ, AO, CP.

tôêacen ptc. _joined to, added_.

tôêcan = tôêacan

tôêcnes = tôîcnes

tôefenes, tôemnes (AO) prep. (d.) _alongside_.

tôendebyrdnes f. _order, series_, BH 216^20.

toeð (#VPs#) = têð

tôêðian _to inspire_, GD 270^13.

tôfæng = tôfeng

tôfær n. _departure, decease_, LkL 9^31.

tôfaran^6 intr. _to be scattered, disperse, separate, disappear_, _Gen,
Lcd_; AO. ['_tofare_']

tôfealdan^7 _to come to land_ (trans. of _L._ 'applicare'), #ÆGr# 138^9.

tôfeallan^7 _to fall down, collapse_, _AO_: _fall apart, fall off_, Æ.
['_tofall_']

tôfeng I. (?) m. _grip, seizure_, #LPs# 123^6. II. pret. 3 sg. of tôfôn.

tôfêran _to go in different directions, separate, disperse_, Æ: _deal
out, distribute_, Æ.

tôferian _to carry different ways, scatter, disperse, get rid of_: _put
off_: _digest_, RB 32^14.

tôfêsian _to drive away, rout_, W.

tôfindan^3 _to find out_.

tôflêam m. _refuge_, #RPs# 93^22.

tô-flêon, -flêogan^2 _to be dispersed, fly apart, burst_, _Lcd_.
['_tofly_']

tôflêotan^2 _to carry away by a flood_, #Chr# 1097.

tôflôwan^7 _to flow down or apart, be spilt, melt_, Æ, CP: _flow away,
ebb_: _flow to, pour in_: _distract_, CP.

tôflôw-(ed)nes, -en(d)nes f. _flowing, flux_, Æ.

tôfôn^7 _to take to, accept, bring back_.

tô-foran, -foren, -foron prep. (w. d.) (time and place) _before_, _BH,
Chr, G_: (superiority) _above, over, beyond_, _Æ, Bo_: _besides_, ÆH
2·584. ['_tofore_']

tôforansettan _to place before_: _come before, anticipate_.

tôforl¯ætan^7 _to dismiss_, OEG 605.

tôforl¯ætennes f. _remission_, Æ.

toft m. _homestead, site of a house_, _KC, Lcd_; LL 400. ['_toft_']

tôfultumian _to help, assist_.

tôfyllan _to smite in pieces_, #PPs# 67^21.

tôfylstan _to help, aid_.

+tog n. _tugging, spasm_, #Lcd# 1·356^3.

tôgædereweard adv. _towards one another_, AO.

tô-gædre, -gædere, -gadere adv. '_together_,' _An, BC, Mt_. tôg. gân,
fôn, cuman _to engage in battle_, #Chr#. [gaderian]

tôgægnes = tôgegnes, tôgêanes

tôg¯ælan _to profane, defile_, #LPs# 88^32.

tôg¯ænan _to say, affirm_, #LPs# 93^4.

tôgân I. anv. pret. 3 sg. tôêode _to go to or into_: (impers. w. g.)
_come to pass, happen_: _separate, part, depart_, _Æ_. ['_togo_'] II.
(#Lcd# 1·364) = tôgang

tôgang m. _approach, access, attack_.

tôgangan^7 _to go away, pass away_, _BH, Rd_. ['_togang_']

tôgêan prep. w. d. _towards_, _MkL_ (-eægn). ['_togains_']

tôgêanes prep. w. d. and a.; adv. _in opposition to, against_, _B, Chr,
SPs_: _towards, to_, _Æ, Bl_. him tôg. _to meet him_: _before_, CP: _in
return, in reply_. ['_togains_']

tôgêare adv. _in this year_, A 8·327^10.

tôgeclifian (eo, y) = tôclifian

tôgeclipian (y^3) _to call together, send for_.

tôgecorennes f. _adoption_, DR 29^14.

tôgeêacnian _to add to, increase_.

tôgeêcan = tôgeîcan

tôgeefnan? _to associate with, join oneself to_? AS 38^8. [MS. tôgeenan]

tôgefultumian = tôfultumian

tôgegnes (A) = tôgêanes

tôgegrîpan^1 _to seize, lay hold of_.

tô-gehihtan, -gehyhtan _to add to_.

tôgehlytto f. _fellowship, union_, DR 109^15.

tôgeîcan _to add to, increase_, A 8·306; GD 62^24.

tôgeîcendlic _added to, adjectival, adjective_, #ÆGr#.

tôgeihtnes f. _addition, increment_, A 8·302.

tôgeladung f. _assembly_, MFH 174.

tôgel¯ædan _to lead to, bring in_.

tôgel¯æstan _to accompany_, WW 365^41.

tôgelaðian _to invite to, summon to_.

tô-gelengian, -gelencgan _to join_.

tôgelêstan = tôgel¯æstan

togen pp. of têon I. (and occly. II.).

tôgenêal¯æcan = tônêal¯æcan

tôgenêdan = tôgenîdan

tôgênes (A) = tôgêanes

tôgengan _to separate_, #Gen# 841.

tôgenîdan (ý) _to compel, force_.

tôgêotan^2 _to pour away, spill_: _spread_: _exhaust_.

tôgesamnian _to assemble together_.

tôgescêadan^7 _to expound, interpret_.

tôgescofen (CP) pp. of tôscûfan.

tôgesettan _to put to_, #RPs# 9^39.

tôgetellan _to reckon, compute_: _compare_.

tôgetêon^2,1 _to draw towards, attract_, #BPs#.

togettan impers. _to twitch, be spasmodic_, #Lcd# 81a. [togian]

tôgeðêodan (îe, ý) _to adhere, cling to_: _adjoin_, BH 56^30.

tôgewegen _applied_, BH.

tôgewunod _accustomed_, AS 23^9.

tôgeýcan = tôgeîcan

togian _to draw, drag_, _HL_ 15^308. ['_tow_']

tôgife, tôgifes adv. _freely, gratis_.

togînan^1 _to be opened, split, gape, yawn_. [cp. _Ger._ gähnen]

tôglîdan^1 _to glide away, split, slip, fall asunder, vanish_, _B, Met_.
['_toglide_']

tôgotennes f. _pouring out, effusion, shedding, spreading_, #Lcd#.

+togu np. _traces (of a horse)_, ÆL 31^973.

togung f. _tugging, twitch, spasm_, #Lcd#.

tôh '_tough_,' _Cp, Ep_: _tenacious, sticky_, _Lcd_.

tôhaccian _to hack to pieces_, _Æ_ (3^186). ['_tohack_']

tôh¯ælan _to emasculate, weaken_, MFH 174.

tôhald = tôheald

tôheald (a, y) adj. and adv. _inclined, forward, in advance_.

tôhêawan^7 _to hew in pieces_, _Æ, Chr_. ['_tohew_']

tôhîgung f. _result, effect_, DR.

tôhiht = tôhyht

tohl = tôl

tôhladan^6 ¶ _to scatter, disperse, destroy_ (or ? *tôhlacan).

tôhlêotan^2 _to divide by lot_.

tôhlic _tough, tenacious_. adv. -lîce.

tôhlîdan^1 _to split, open, spring apart, burst, gape, break_, AO.

tohlîne f. _tow-line_, WW. [togian]

tôhlocen = tôlocen pp. of tôlûcan.

tôhlystan _to listen_, CP.

tôhnescian _to soften_, #Lcd#.

tôhopa m. _hope_, _Bo, PPs_; CP. ['_tohope_']

tôhopian _to hope_, CP.

tôhopung f. _faith, trust_, ÆL 23^155.

tôhrêosan^2 _to fall to pieces, decay_, _BH, W_; ÆL. ['_toreose_']

tôhrêran _to break, shake to pieces, destroy_.

tôhricod ptc. _cut off, dispersed_, GPH 398,399.

tôhrýran _to shake in pieces_, v. OEG 2261.

+toht n. _battle array, battle_, #Ma# 104.

tohte ¶ f. _fight, conflict, battle, campaign_.

tôhwega adv. and sb. _somewhat, some, a little_.

tôhweorfan^3 _to go away, separate, scatter, disperse_, #Chr#.

tôhwon adv. _wherefore, why_: _to which (point)_, _to what extent, how
far, how long_: _to which end, for what purpose or reason_.

tôhyht m. _hope, refuge, consolation_.

tôhyld = tôheald

tôîcan (ê, ý) _to increase_, BH 112^1#b#.

tôîcnes (ê^2) f. _increase_, BH 226^31.

tôiernan^3 _to run to, run together_: _flow away, be dispersed_: _run
hither and thither, wander about_.

tôirnan = tôiernan

tol = toll

tôl n. _'tool,' instrument, implement_, _Æ, Bo, LL_: _weapon_, _ZDA_
9·424.

tôl¯ægon pret. pl. of tôlicgan.

tôl¯ætan^7 _to disperse, relax, release_.

tôlætennes f. _despondency_, #Lcd# 1·262^3.

tolcendlîce adv. _wantonly_, GPH 401.

tolcettende '_indruticans_,' v. OEG 1218.

tolcetung f. _wanton excitement_, OEG.

tôlecgan _to disjoin, separate_. [_Ger._ zerlegen]

tôleoðian = tôliðian

tôlês- = tôlýs-

tolfrêo '_toll-free_,' _KC_ 4·209.

tolgetung = tolcetung

tôlic = tôhlic

tôlicgan^5 _to lie or extend in different directions, separate, part,
divide_, _AO, BC_. ['_tolie_']

tôliðian (eo) _to dismember, separate_, Æ.

toll mn. _impost_, _'toll,' tribute_, _Chr, EC, Mt, OEG_:
_passage-money_, _Æ_: _rent_, _Æ_: _act or right of taking toll_, _Æ_.

tollere m. _tax-gatherer, publican_, _Æ, WW_. ['_toller_']

tollsceam-ol, -ul m. _seat of custom, treasury_, G.

tollscîr f. _taxing district_, ÆH 2·468^25.

toln f. _toll, custom, duty_, _TC_. ['_tolne_']

tolnere m. _tax-gatherer_, _WW_. ['_tolner_']

tolsetl n. _place of toll or custom_, Æ.

tôlûcan^2 _to pull apart, dislocate, destroy_, _BH_. ['_tolouk_']

tôlýsan _to dissolve, loosen, relax_, Æ: _unhinge, separate, break
open_.

tô-lýsednes, -lýsnes f. _loosing, dissolution, dispersion, destruction,
release, dismissal_: _desolation_, GD: _death_.

tôlýsend m. _destroyer_, WW 220^13.

tôlýsendlic _destructive_, #LPs# 119^4.

tôlýsing (ê) f. _loosing, release, redemption_: _destruction_, #Lcd#
3·20 6^20.

tom = tam

tôm adj. w. g. _free from_, _Cr_ 1211. ['_toom_']

tômældan _to hinder by speech_, DD 26. [meldian]

tômearcian _to distinguish, describe, note down, enrol_.

tômearcodnes f. _enumeration, census, enrolment_, Lk 2^2.

tô-mergen, -merigen (Æ) = tômorgen

tômetan^5 _to mete out_, #LPs# 107^8.

tômiddes prep. (w. d.) _amidst, among, in the midst of_, _Æ, Jn_; AO,
CP. adv. _into the midst_, _B, Lcd_. ['_tomids_']

tômorgen adv. _to-morrow_.

tôn dsmn. of tôh.

tônama m. _other name, surname_, _Mk_; Æ. ['_toname_']

+tônamian v. +tornamian.

tônêal¯æcan _to approach_, #Pss#.

tônemnan _to distinguish by name, name_, AO.

tônêolîcan = tônêal¯æcan

tong = tang

tonge = tange  [[under "tange"]]

tonian _to thunder_, #ÆGr# 138^3.

tonice = tunece

tôniman^4 _to divide, separate, take apart_: _take away_.

tônom- = tônam-

top m. _'top' (highest part)_, _WW_ 143^25: _tassel, tuft_: _top
(plaything)_? _ball_? #ApT# 13^13.

toppa m. _thread_, OEG 23^45.

tor = torr

tôr¯æcan (pret. 3 sg. tôr¯æhte) _to join, put together_, OEG 4489.

tôrændan = tôrendan

toranêage = torenîge  [[under "torenêage"]]

tôrbegete (o?) _hard to get_, #Lcd# 43b.

torcht = torht

torct- = torht-

torcul n. _wine-press_, MtR 21^33. [_L._]

torcyrre _hard to convert_, MH 110^15.

tord n. _piece of excrement, dung, filth_, #Lcd#.

tordwifel m. _dung-beetle_, #Lcd#.

toren pp. of teran.

tôrendan (æ) _to rend apart, tear in pieces_, _MkL, PPs_. ['_torend_']

toren-êage, -îg(g)e, -îege _blear-eyed_, CP.

tôrêosan = tôhrêosan

tôrfian _to throw, cast missiles, shoot, stone_, _Mk_; Æ: _be tossed_,
NC 326. ['_torve_']

torfung f. _throwing, casting (of stones)_, AO.

torht I. n. _clearness, brightness_. II. adj. _bright, radiant,
beautiful, splendid, noble, illustrious_, _Ph_. ['_torht_']

torhte adv. _brightly, clearly_: _beautifully, splendidly_.

torhtian _to show_, Cp 216#i#.

torhtlic ¶ _bright, clear, radiant, glorious_. adv. -lîce.

torhtmôd ¶ _glorious, noble_.

torhtnes f. _radiance, splendour_.

tôrinnan (CP) = tôiernan

torn I. n. _anger, indignation_: _grief, misery, suffering, pain_.
[_Ger._ zorn] II. adj. _bitter, cruel, grievous_.

+tornamian _to name besides, surname_, LkL 6^14 (= tônamian, BT)

torncwide ¶ m. _offensive speech_.

torne ¶ adv. _indignantly, insultingly, bitterly, grievously_.

torngemôt n. _battle_, B 1140.

torngenîðla ¶ m. _angry opponent_.

tornîge = torenîge  [[under "torenêage"]]

tornlic _sorrowful, grievous_, #PPs# 125^5.

tornmôd _angry_, #Gu# 621.

tornsorg f. _sorrow, care_, FT 76.

tornword n. _offensive expression_, #Cr# 172.

tornwracu f. _revenge_, #Gu# 272.

tornwyrdan _to be incensed_? AO 54^2.

toroc _grub, weevil_? WW 224^38 (ES 41·164).

tôroren = tôhroren pp. of tôhrêosan.

torr m. _'tower,' watch-tower_, _CP, MtL_; AO: _rock, crag_, Mdf. [_L._
turris]

tôryne m. _running together, concourse_, ES 39·353.

tôrýpan _to scratch_, EC 164^18.

tôs¯ælan (impers., w. d. pers. and g. thing) _to be unsuccessful, fail_:
_lack, want_.

tôsamne = tôsomne

tôsâwan^7 _to strew, scatter, spread_, Æ.

tosca m. _frog, toad_, DR, #PPs#.

tôscacan = tôsceacan

tôscâdan (#KGl#) = tôscêadan

tôscâdennes = tôscêadenes

tôscægde v. tôscecgan.

tôsc¯ænan _to break in pieces, break_, _Æ, JnL, MkLR_. ['_toshene_']

tôsceacan^6 (a) _to shake in pieces_, _WW_: _drive asunder, drive away,
shake off_, _Æ_. ['_toshake_']

tôscêacerian _to scatter_, ÆL 23^24.

tôscêad n. _distinguishing, distinction, difference_, Æ, CP.

tôscêadan^7 (â) _to part, separate, scatter, divide_: _set at variance_,
CP: _discern, discriminate, distinguish, decide_, _Æ, Bo_; CP: _differ_.
['_toshed_']

tôscêadend m. _divider, separator_, WW 223^34.

tôscêadenes (â) f. _separation_: _distinction_.

tôscecgan (æ) _to be separate, differ_, BH 160^25n.

tôscelian = tôscylian  [[under "tôscyllan"]]

tôscêotan^2 intr. _to spring apart, disperse_, _Æ_. ['_toshoot_']

tôscerian (#KGl#) = tôscirian

tôscirian (e, y) _to divide, detach, separate_, #Gl#.

tôscrîðan^1 _to flow apart, disperse_.

tôscûfan^2 _to push apart, scatter_: _impel, incite_, CP: _do away,
remove_.

tôscyftan _to divide, distribute_. [sciftan]

tôscyl-lan, -ian (e) tr. and intr. _to separate, divide_, NC 351.

tôscyrian = tôscirian

tôsêcan _to find out_, AS 7^13?

tôsendan (tr.) _to send to_: _send apart, send out, disperse_:
_destroy_.

tôsêoðan^2 _to boil thoroughly_, #Lcd#.

tôsetednes f. '_dispositio_' #EPs# 72^7.

tôsettan '_disponere_,' #Pss, Bl#.

tôsîgan^1 _to wear out, be threadbare_, Æ.

tôsittan^5 _to be separated_, AO.

tôslacian _to slacken, relax, loosen, dissolve_.

tôsl¯æfan _to cut up_, NR 32^2.

tôslêan^6 _to strike in pieces, destroy_, _Æ, AO, Gl_: _drive away_, RB
18^3,4. ['_toslay_']

tôslîfan^1 _to split_, WW.

tôslîtan^1 _to tear asunder, rend, wound, break open, open_, Æ, CP:
_interrupt_: _separate, scatter, destroy_, CP: _distract_: _be
different_, NG.

tôslitnes (y^2) f. _laceration_: _division_.

tôslûpan^2 _to slip away, be relaxed, fall to pieces, open, dissolve_,
Æ, CP: _melt (with fear)_: _be paralysed_. tôslopen _relaxed, loose,
dissolute_.

tôslûping f. _dissolving, dissolution_, #Sc# 68^8.

tôsmêagan _to inquire into, consider_, #Bo# 148^5.

tôsn¯ædan _to cut up_, NR 28^5.

tôsnîðan^1 _to cut asunder, cut up_: _cut off, amputate_.

tôsôcn f. _visiting_, NC 326.

tôsôcnes f. _pursuit_, DR 28^18.

tôsôcnung f. _pursuit_, DR 81^7.

tôsomne adv. _together_, _Æ, AO, Bl_; CP. t. cuman _to engage in
battle_. ['_tosame_']

tôsomnian _to collect together, bring together_, BH 230^7.

tôsôðan adv. _in sooth, in truth_.

tôspecan = tôsprecan

tôspr¯æc f. _speaking to (another)_, _conversation_, Æ, CP.

tôspr¯ædan _to spread out_, _IM_; Æ. ['_tospread_']

tôsprecan^5 _to speak to, speak_.  [[from first edition]]

tôspringan^3 _to spring apart, fly asunder, crack_, _Æ_. ['_tospring_']

tôsprytting f. _inciting_, #Chr# 1101.

tosta = tosca

tôstæncan = tôstencan

tôstandan^6 _to be put off, not to occur_: _stand apart, differ from, be
discordant_, Æ.

tôstencan (¯æ) _to scatter, disperse, drive apart, drag along_, Æ, CP:
_nullify, destroy_: _perish_, #SPs# 829^9.

tô-stencednes (Æ), -stenc(en)nes, f. _dispersion, dissolution,
destruction_.

tôstencend m. _prodigal_, #Lcd#.

tôsteng- = tôstenc-

tôstician _to pierce_, AO 128^14.

tôstihtan _to order, arrange_, #CPs# 111^5.

tôstincan^3 _to distinguish by smell_, ÆH 2·372.

tôstingan^3 _to thrust in, pierce_, #Lcd#.

tô-stregdan, -strêdan^3 (and wv.) _to scatter, dissipate, disperse_, CP:
_distract_: _destroy_.

tôstrêt (CP) pres. 3 sg. of tôstregdan.

tôsundrian _to separate_.

tôswâpan^7 ¶ _to disperse_.

tôswellan^3 _to swell out_, _Æ_. ['_toswell_']

tôswengan _to drive asunder, destroy_. [swingan]

tôsweorcan^3 _to obscure_, OEG 1737.

tôswîfan^1 intr. _to separate_, #Met# 11^36.

tôsyndrian _to sunder, separate, divide_: _discriminate_.

+tot n. _pomp, parade, vainglory_, Æ.

tôtalu f. _reputation_, DR 102^3.

tôtellan _to distinguish_, #Met# 16^15.

tôtêon^2,1 _to draw asunder, pull apart, rend, destroy_, AO: _take to
oneself, claim for oneself_, LL (or ? tô prep.).

tôteran^4 _to tear in pieces, bite, lacerate, cut out_, Æ, AO, CP:
_destroy_: _harass (mind)_.

tôtian _to peep out, stick out_, _CP_ 105^5. ['_toot_']

tôtihting f. _instigation_, #Chr# 1094.

tôtorfian _to cast about, toss_, Mt 14^24.

tôtræglian _to pull to pieces, strip_, GPH 396^267.

tôtredan^5 _to tread to pieces_? #Gl#.

totrida m. _swing_? #Gl#, WW 276^27.

tôtw¯æman (ê, êa) _to separate, divide, dis-sever_, _AO_; Æ: _break up,
break in pieces, dissolve_: _cause to cease_, LL: _divorce_, #Chr#
958#d#. ['_totweme_']

tôtw¯æmednes f. _separation, distinction_.

tô-twêman, -twêaman = tôtw¯æman

tôð m., ds. and nap. têð, occl. ds. tôðe and nap. tôð(as) '_tooth_,'
_Cp, Lcd, LL, MtR, VPs_; AO: _tusk_, WW 397^27. tôðum ontýnan _to
utter_.

tôðece (æ^2) m. _toothache_.

tôðenednes f. _stretching, distention_, OEG 5452.

tôðênian _to attend upon, serve_, #Sc# 102^9.

tôðening f. _distension_, OEG 2^476.

tôðênung f. _administration_, CM 1185.

tôðerscan^3 _to dash in pieces_, #Chr# 1009.

tôðgâr m. _tooth-pick_, #Lcd# 13b.

tôðindan^3 _to swell up, inflate, puff up_, Æ: _be arrogant_.

tôðlêas _toothless_, GPH 394.

tôðmægen n. _strength of tusks_, #GnC# 20.

tôðr¯æstan _to crush, destroy_, #CPs# 106^16.

tôðreoma = tôðrima

tôðrescan = tôðerscan

tôðrima (eo^2) m. _enclosure of teeth, gum_.

tôðringan _to drive asunder_, #Rd# 4^27.

tôðsealf f. _tooth salve_, #Lcd#.

tôðsticca m. _toothpick_, WW 219^3.

tôðunden pp. of tôðindan.

tôðundenes f. _the state of being puffed up, arrogance_, Æ.

tôðundenlic _arrogant_. adv. -lîce.

tôðunian _to astonish_, WW 346^22.

tôðwærc m. _toothache_, #Lcd#.

tôðwînan^1 _to disappear_, HL 15^200. [dwînan]

tôðwyrm m. _a worm in the teeth_, #Lcd# 19a.

tôwælede (NG) pret. sg. of *tôwealwian _to roll to_.

tôward = tôweard

tôwardes = tôweardes

towcræft m. _spinning_, HL 10^339.

tôweard I. adj. _facing, approaching, impending_, _BH, Bl, Lcd_:
_future_, _Æ, Bl, Bo, Mk_. II. prep. (w. d., g.) _towards_, _AO, CP_.
III. adv. _towards, forwards_. ['_toward_,' '_towards_']

tôweardes = tôweard II., III.

tôweardlic _in the future_, Æ. adv. -lîce, BH 368^21.

tôweardnes f. _future, time to come_.

tôweaxan^7 _to grow apart_, NR 22.

tôweccan _to arouse, excite_, B 2948.

tôwegan^5 _disperse, scatter_, #Ph# 184.

tôwendan _to overthrow, subvert, destroy_, _Æ, AO_. ['_towend_']

tôweorpan^3 (e, u, y) _to cast down, break in pieces, dissipate, blot
out, destroy_, _Æ, Bo, Mt_; AO, CP: _throw out_, CP. ['_towarp_']

tôwerd = tôweard

tôwerpan = tôweorpan

tô-wesnes (CP), -wesenes, -westnes (BH) f. _dissolution_: _separation,
discord, dissension_.

towettan _to associate with_, LL (322^31).

towhûs n. _tow-house, spinning-house or chamber_, WW 186^29.

tô-wiðere, -wiðre prep. (w. d., a.) _against_: _in answer to_.

towlic _belonging to thread_. t. weorc _material for spinning_, WW.

towmýderce f. _tow-chest_? _work-box_? TC 538^21.

tôword (#VPs#) = tôweard

tôworpednes = tôworpennes

tôworpennes f. _subversion, destruction, desolation_, Æ, CP:
_dispersion_: _casting out, expulsion_.

tôwrecan^5 ¶ _to drive asunder, scatter, dissipate_.

tôwrîtan^1 '_adscribere_,' '_describere_,' OEG 1065.

tôwritennes f. _writing down, description_, Æ.

tôwrîðan^1 _to twist apart, distort_. #ÆGr# 155^15.

towtôl n. _spinning implement_, LL 455[15,1].

tôwunderlic '_admirabilis_,' #SPs# 41^4.

tôwurpan (Æ) = tôweorpan

tôwyrd I. f. _opportunity_, BH 52^21. II. = tôweard

tôwyrpan = tôweorpan

tôwyrpendlic _destructible_, GPH 394.

tôwyrpnes = tôworpennes

toxa (OEG 1858) = tosca

tôýcan = tôîcan

tôyrnan = tôiernan

tracter _funnel_, NC 351. [_L._ trajectorium]

træd pret. 3 sg., tr¯ædon pret. pl. of tredan.

træf n., nap. tr(e)afu _tent, pavilion_: _dwelling, building_, #An# 844.

træglian _to pluck, pull_, GPH 398.

trændel = trendel

træppe = treppe

trafu v. træf.

trâg I. ¶ adj. _evil, mean, bad_. II. f. _evil, affliction_, #El# 668.

trâge adv. _evilly, cruelly_, #PPs# 108^20.

-trâglice v. un-t.  [[headword spelled "untrâglîce"]]

traht m. _text, passage_: _exposition, treatise, commentary_, Æ. [_L._
tractus]

trahtað m. _commentary_, WW. [_L._]

trahtbôc f. _(religious) treatise, commentary_, Æ. [trahtian]

traht-ere, -nere (Æ) m. _expounder, commentator, expositor_.

±traht-ian, -nian (Æ) _to treat, comment on, expound, consider_. [_L._
tractare; _Ger._ trachten]

trahtnung, trahtung f. _explanation, exposition, commentary_, Æ.

trâisc _tragic_, BH 154^3.

tramet m. _page (of a book)_, #ÆGr#.

trandende (o^1) _precipitous, steep_, Cp 805#p#.

trappe = treppe

tratung = trahtung  [[under "trahtnung"]]

trê (NG), trêa (#VPs#) = trêow I.

treaflice _grievously_, #PPs# 102^6.

treafu v. træf.

±trêagian _to sew together, mend_, OEG.

treaht- = traht-

trêawa = trêowa

±tredan^5 (eo) tr. and intr. _to 'tread,' step on, trample_, _B, CP,
PPs_; AO, Æ: _traverse, pass over, enter upon, roam through_, _B_.

treddan _to tread on, trample_: _investigate_.

-tredde v. ele-, wîn-t.

treddian ¶ _to tread, step, walk_.

trede _fit to tread on, firm_, #Cr# 1166.

tredel m. _step_, WW 117^6: _sole of foot_, LL 438[21]. ['_treadle_']

tredend m. _treader_, WW 197^9.

trêg = trîg

trega m. _misfortune, misery, trouble, grief, pain_, _Gen, Met, RB_.
['_tray_']

tregian _to trouble, harass, vex_: _grieve_.

+tregian _to feel repugnance at_, A 2·358.

trehtere = trahtere

trem == trym

tremegan = trymian, trymman  [[under "trymian"]]

tremes = trymes

tremm- = trymm-

-tremman v. wið-t.

trendan _to turn round, revolve, roll_, NC 326.

trendel (æ, y) n. _sphere, circle, ring, orb_, _Æ, Chr, Lcd_: _circus_.
['_trendle_']

trendeled (y^1, y^2) _made round_, WW 152^5. [v. '_trindle_']

trendelnes f. _circuit, surrounding space_, #RPs# 11^9 (u^1).

-trendlian v. â-t.

trêo == trêow

treodan (#VPs#) = tredan

trêoð = trêowð

trêow I. n. (nap. trêowu, trêow) '_tree_,' _Æ, BH, CP, VPs_; Mdf: _wood,
timber_, _BH_: _beam, log, stake, stick_, _AO, Bl_; CP: _wood, grove_:
_tree of the cross, cross_, _Rood_. II. f. (û, ý) _truth, fidelity,
faith, trust, belief_: _pledge, promise, agreement, treaty_: _favour,
grace, kindness_. [_Ger._ treue]

trêowa (AO, CP) = trûwa

trêowan = trîewan

trêowcynn n. _species of tree_, Æ.

trêowe I. = trîewe. II. = trêow II.

trêowen (î, ý) _of a tree, of wood, wooden_, _Lcd_; Æ. ['_treen_']

trêowfæst _true, faithful_, _MtL, PPs_; Æ. ['_truefast_']

+trêowfæstnian _to be trusty_, MtL p4^12.

trêowfêging f. _joining together (of boards)_, WW 206^34.

trêowfugol m. _forest bird_, #Gu# 707.

±trêowful _faithful, trusty, true_. adv. -lîce.

+trêowfulnes f. '_Israel_' (!) #RPs# 21^25; Hy 7^63.

trêowgeðofta ¶ m. _faithful comrade_.

trêowgeweorc n. _wood-work, a structure of timber_, BH 272^5.

trêowgewrid n. _thicket of trees_, #Guth# 20^7.

trêowian = trîewan

±trêowlêas _faithless, treacherous, false_, CP: _unbelieving_.

trêowlêasnes f. _treachery, faithlessness_: _unbelief, heresy_.

trêowlic _true, faithful, trusty_. adv. -lîce, _PPs_. ['_truly_']

trêowloga m. _pledge-breaker_, B 2847.

trêowlufu f. _true love_, #Cr# 538.

trêownes (ê) f. _object of trust_, _Bo_ 149^25. ['_trueness_']

trêowr¯æden f. _state of fidelity_, #Gen# 2305.

±trêowsian _to plight one's faith_, _Chr, LL_ (ý): _exculpate oneself_.
['_treowse_']

trêowsteall n. _grove, plantation_, EC, KC.

trêowstede m. _grove_, WW 149^17.

trêowteru (trêot-) n. _tree-tar, resin_, WW.

±trêowð (îe, ý) f. _'truth,' veracity_, AO: _troth, faith, fidelity_,
_Æ, AO_: _pledge, covenant_, _Æ_.

trêowðrâg f. _time for faithfulness, fidelity_, #Rim# 57.

trêowufæst = trêowfæst

trêowwæstm m. _produce of trees_, #Chr#.

trêowweorðung f. _tree-worshipping_, LL.

trêowwyrhta (ý) m. _wood-worker, carpenter, joiner_.

trêowwyrm m. _cankerworm, caterpillar_, #CJVPs# 77^46.

treppan I. _to 'trap,'_ _KGl_. II. _to tread_.

treppe (a, æ) f. _'trap,' snare_, _WW_.

tret (#KGl#) pres. 3 sg. of tredan.

trêu == trêo, trêow

trêw = trêow

trêw- = trêow-, trîew-

tribulian = trifulian

trideð, triedeð = tredeð, tritt pres. 3 sg. of tredan.

trîew- = trêow-

±trîewan (ê, êo, î, ý) w. d. _to believe, trust in, hope, be confident,
rely (on)_, _B, Bo, Gen_: (refl.) _exculpate oneself_, _LL_: (+)
_persuade, suggest_: _make true or credible_: _be faithful (to)_.
['_trow_']

±trîewe (ê, êo, î, û, ý) _'true' ('i-treowe'), faithful, honest,
trustworthy_, _Æ, B, Chr, LL, WW_; AO.

trifelung f. _grinding, pounding, stamping_, WW 423^25.

trifet (#KGl#), trifot (#Gl#) sb. _tribute_. [_L._ tributum]

trifulian _to break, bruise, stamp_. [_L._ tribulare]

trîg (ê) n. _wooden board, 'tray,'_ _Lcd_.

trilidi = ðrilîði  [[form of "ðrilîðe"?]]

trim- = trym-

trimilchi = ðrimeolce

trinda? m., trinde? f. _round lump, ball_, #Lcd# 139b.

trindhyrst m. _circular copse_?

tringan^3 _press_, #APs# 103^33 (? *twingan, BT).

trîo- = trêo-, trêow-

trit, tritt pres. 3 sg. of tredan.

trîw == trêow

trîwe = trîewe

trîwen (_WW_) = trêowen

trochscip = trogscip

trod n., trodu f. _track, trace_, _B, LL_. ['_trod_'; tredan]

trog m. _hollow vessel_, _'trough,' tray_, _BC, Gl, JnL, Lcd_: _canoe,
boat_, AO.

trôg (NG) = drôg pret. 3 sg. of dragan.

troghrycg _ridge where there is a water-trough_? EC 447^20.

trogscip n. _a kind of boat_, WW.

troh (LWS) == trog

trôh = ðrôh

trondende _precipitous, steep_, Cp 805#p#.

tropere m. _a book containing verses sung at certain festivals before
the Introit_. [_Late L._ troparium]

trûa = trûwa, trêowa

±trucian _to fail, run short_, _Æ_: _deceive, disappoint_. ['_troke_']

trûg- = trûw-

trûgon (NG) = drôgon pret. pl. of dragan.

trûht (u?) _trout_, _Æ_. [_L._ tructa]

trum _firm, fixed, secure, strong, sound, vigorous, active_, Æ, CP.

+trum n. _legion, army, host_.

truma m. (±) _legion, troop_, AO; Æ: _regular order, array_, AO.
['_trume_']

trumian _to grow strong, recover health, amend_, BH: (+) _make strong_.

truming f. _recovery of strength_, #Lcd# 3·210^30.

trumlic _firm, durable, substantial, sound_, CP: _confirming,
exhorting_. adv. -lîce.

trumnað m. _confirmation_, #Gu# 729.

trumnes f. _soundness, health_, CP: _firmness, strength, stability_, Æ:
_the firmament, heavens_: _confirmation, support_.

trundulnes = trendelnes

trûs m. _brushwood (for fuel)_, _KC_. ['_trouse_']

trûð m. _trumpeter, buffoon, actor_, Æ.

trûðhorn m. _trumpet, clarion_, #Gl#.

trûw = trêow

±trûwa (êo, ý) m. _fidelity, faith, confidence, trust, belief_: _pledge,
promise, agreement, covenant_: _protection_.

+trûwe = +trîewe

±trûwian (êo, ý) occl. pret. trûwde _to trust_, _Æ, CP, JnL_. ['_trow_']

+trûwung f. _prop, stay, confidence_, #CPs# 88^19.

+tryccan _to confide, trust_, JnL 16.

tryddian = treddian

trydeð = tredeð, tritt pres. 3 sg. of tredan.

trym ¶ (e) n. _small piece, short length_. fôtes t. _a foot's length_.

trym- = trum-, trymm-

+trym n. _firmament_, #PPs# 71^16.

+trymednes (#LPs# 104^16) = +trymnes

try-mes (_Mt_) mf., -messe f., -messa m. _a drachm weight_: _an English
coin_. (v. LL 2·683): _a Roman coin, 'tremissis,'_ = 3 _denarii_.
['_thrimsa_']

trymian, trymman (e) _to strengthen, fortify, confirm, comfort, exhort,
incite_, _CP, Chr, Gen_: _set in order, arrange, prepare, array, arm_,
_AO, Bl_: _become strong_: _be arrayed_: _give (hostages)_. ['_trim_']

-trymig, -trymmig v. un-t.

trymmend m. _supporter_: _one who makes an agreement_.

trymmendlic _hortatory, encouraging_.

±trymmung f. _confirmation, strengthening, encouragement_, Æ: _support,
prop_: _edification_, Æ: _ordinance_: (+) _fortress_, #KGl# 67^4.

trymnes f. _firmness, solidity_: _firmament, prop, support_: (±)
_confirmation, strengthening, encouragement_: (±) _exhortation,
instruction_: (+) _arrangement, setting in order_. [trumnes]

tryms = trymes

trymð (i) f. _strength, support, staff, prop_, AS, #LPs#.

tryndel == trendel

trýw = trêow

trýw- = trêow-, trîew-

tu = ðu

Tû = Tîw

tû = twâ

tua = tuwa

tuâ = twâ

tube f. _trumpet_, GPH 391. [_L._ tuba]

±tûcian _to disturb, ill-treat, torment, punish_, _Æ, Bo, Met_: (+)
_bedeck_, #PPs# 44^11. ['_tuck_']

tud? mn., tudu f? _shield_, OEG 5025 (cp. 747n)

tudder, tuddor = tûdor

tuddorfôster m. _nourishment of offspring_, WW 219^17.

tuddorful _prolific, fruitful_, #Gl#.

tuddorspêd f. _fertility_, #Gen# 2752.

tuddortêonde ¶ _begetting issue_.

tuddres gs. of tuddor.  [[under "tudder"]]

tûdor, tûder n. _posterity, offspring, descendant, issue_, _Æ, CP, Lcd,
WW_: _fruit_. ['_tudder_']

tûdorfæst _fertile_, WW 400^35.

tûdornes f. _offspring_, OEG 3849 (tydder-).

tugon pret. pl. of têon.

tui- = twi-

tulge comp. tylg, superl. tylgest _strongly, firmly, well_.

tumbere m. _tumbler, dancer, player_, #ÆGr# 35^6.

tumbian _to tumble, leap, dance_, _G_. ['_tumb_']

tumbing f. _dancing_, NC 327.

tûn m. _enclosure, garden, field, yard_, _Chr, Gl, G, Lcd_: _farm,
manor_, _A, BC, LL_: _homestead, dwelling, house, mansion_, AO, CP:
_group of houses, village, 'town,'_ _Æ, Gl, JnL_, v. LL 2·352. [v. Mdf]

tûn-cerse (æ^2) f., -cressa m. _garden-cress, nasturtium_, _Cp, Ep,
Lcd_. ['_towncress_']

tûncirce f. _church in a_ 'tûn,' TC.

tunder = tynder

tunece f. _under-garment, tunic, coat, toga_, Æ, AO. [_L._ tunica]

+tunecod _clothed in a toga_, GPH 393.

tûnesman (_LL_) = tûnmann. ['_townsman_']

tunge f. (m) '_tongue_,' _Æ, BH, CP, Lcd_: _speech, language_, _CP,
Mk, RB_.

tûngebûr m. _inhabitant, resident_, #Gl#.

tungel == tungol

tungele? _talkative_, OEG 56^139.

tûngerêfa m. _town-reeve, bailiff_, Æ: _prætor_.

tungeðrum _tongue-ligament_, _Lcd_. [v. '_thrum_']

tungful _talkative_, #Sc# 81^9.

tungilsinwyrt = tunsingwyrt

tungle ds. of tungol.

tunglen _starry_, DHy. [tungol]

tunglere m. _astrologer_, #Gl#.

tungol nm., nap. tunglu, tungol and (late) tunglan _luminary, star,
planet, constellation_, Æ, AO (-gul).

tungol¯æ f. _astronomy_, OEG.

tungolb¯ære (e^2) _covered with stars_, OEG.

tungolcræft m. _star-craft, astronomy_, Æ.

tungol-cræftiga, -cræftga m. _magician, astrologer_.

tungolcræftwîse (e^2) f. _astronomy_, WW 346^2.

tungolgescêad n. _astrology_, #Gl#.

tungolgim m. _(bright) star_, #Cr# 1151.

tungolwîtega m. _star prophet, astrologer_, Æ.

tungul = tungol

tungwôd _sharp-tongued_, #Sc# 223^13.

tûnhôfe f. _ground ivy_, _Lcd_ 123a. ['_tunhoof_']

tunice = tunece

tûnincel n. _small property, small farm_, #Gl#.

tuningwyrt = tunsingwyrt

tûnland n. _land forming a_ 'tûn' _or manor_, EC 445^6.

tûnlic _rustic_, WW 127^15.

tûnmann m. _villager, rustic, villein_, _Æ, WW_. ['_townman_']

tûnmelde f. _orach (plant)_, WW 215^33.

tunne f. _'tun,' cask, barrel_, _BC, Cp_; Æ.

tunnebotm m. _bottom of a cask, drum_? WW 123^10.

tûnprêost m. _village priest_, #Chr# 870#f#.

tûnr¯æd m. _town council_, ÆL 30^297.

tûnscipe m. _'township,' population of a village_, _BH, LL_.

tûnscîr f. _administration of an estate, stewardship_, Lk 16.

tunsingwyrt f. _white hellebore_, #Lcd#.

tûnsôcn f. _'villarum jura regalia,' legal jurisdiction over a village_,
TC 308^7 (v. LL 2·455).

tûnsteall m. _farm-stead, farm yard_? KC.

tûnstede m. _village_, WW 144^26.

tunuce = tunece

tûnweg m. _'privata via,' by-road_.

tûnyncel = tûnincel

tûr m. _'tower,' Chr_ 1097; DR 176^7.

turf f., gds. tyrf _'turf,' sod, soil_, _Cp, Guth_; #Lcd#: _greensward_,
_BH, WW_.

turfhaga m. _grassy plot_ (or ?= tyrfhaga A 35·141), #El# 830.

turfhlêow n. _covering of turf_, KC.

turfian = torfian  [[headword spelled "tôrfian"]]

turl _ladle_, Cp 290#t#. [_L._ trulla]

±turnian _to turn, revolve_.

turnigendlic _revolving_.

turning f. _rotation_, W 253^14.

turtla m., turtle f. _turtle-dove_, Æ. [_L._ turtur]

turtur m., turture f. _turtle-dove_.

tûsc m. _'tusk,' grinder, canine tooth_.

tuu = tû, twâ

Tuu = Tîw

tuwa (Æ, AO, CP), tuwwa (= twiwa) adv. _twice_.

tûx = tûsc

tûxel, tûxl m. _tusk, canine or molar tooth_.

twâ I. (v. twêgen). II. adv. _twice_. tû swâ lang(e) _twice as long_.

twa- = twi-, twy-

twaddung? twædding f. _adulation_, NC 327.

tw¯æde num. _two parts out of three, two-thirds_. [twâ]

+tw¯æfan w. g. _to separate from, deprive of_: _hinder_: w. a. _put an
end to_.

tw¯ægen (M) = twêgen

twælf (M) = twelf

tw¯æm v. twêgen.

±tw¯æman (ê) _to divide into two, separate_: _cause to cease, adjust,
settle_. [twâ]

tw¯æmendlîce adv. _alternately, separately_, OEG 1368.

tw¯æming f. _parting, division, separation_, Æ: _distinction_, Æ.

tw¯æonung = twêonung

twâm v. twêgen.

+twang n. _sport_, OEG 1517.

twânihte _two days old_, #Lcd#.

twe- = twi-

twêgen num. nom. m.; nom. f. twâ; nom. n. tû, twâ; gen. mfn. twêg(e)a,
twêgra; dat. tw¯æm, twâm _two_, AO, CP. tû swâ lang _twice as long_.
t. and t., twâm and twâm _in parties of two each_.

twêgentig (oe; NG) = twêntig

twelf '_twelve_,' CP.

twelffeald _twelve-fold_, Æ.

twelfgylde _twelve-fold_, LL 3[1].

twelfhund _twelve hundred_, LL.

twelfhynde adj. _belonging to the class whose_ 'wergild' _was 1200
shillings_, LL.

twelfnihte _twelve days old_, #Lcd# 3·178^26.

twelfta I. '_twelfth_,' AO. II. = Twelftadæg

Twelftadæg m. Twelfth day, LL 296[17].

twelfte, _twelfthly, in the twelfth place_, LL 182[12].

twelftig = hundtwelftig

twelfwintre _twelve years old_, CP.

twêman = tw¯æman

twengan _to pinch_, IM. ['_twinge_']

twêntig '_twenty_,' Æ, AO.

twêntigfeald _twenty-fold_, #ÆGr#.

twêntigoða (io^3, o^3, u^3) _twentieth_.

twêntigwintre _twenty years old_, W 3^1.

twêo (+ at AS 21^4) m. _doubt, ambiguity_, Æ, AO, CP.

tweo- = twi-, twy-

twêogan = twêon

twêogende _doubting_, BH.

twêogendlic _doubtful, uncertain_, AO. adv. -lîce.

tweolf = twelf

twêolic (î, ý) _doubtful, ambiguous, equivocal_. adv. -lîce, AO, CP.

±twêon I. pret. sg. twêode _to doubt, hesitate_, AO, CP: (impers. w. a.
of pers.) _seem doubtful_. II. (î, ý) m. _doubt_, #Bo#.

twêonelêoht n. _twilight_, WW 175^34.

±twêonian (ý) (pers. and impersonal) _to doubt, be uncertain,
hesitate_, CP.

twêonigend, twêoniendlic (î, ý) _doubtful, expressing doubt_, Æ. adv.
-lîce _perhaps_.

twêonol (ý) _doubtful_.

twêontig = twêntig

twêonullêoht (WW 175^39) = twêonelêoht

twêonum in phr. 'be (s¯æm, etc.) twêonum,' _between (the seas, etc.)_.

twêonung (î, ý) f. _doubt, scruple_, Æ.

+tweosa = +twisa

twêoung = twêonung

tweowa = tuwa

twi, twia = tuwa

twî = twig n.

twi- prefix with meaning _two, double_ (see also twy-). [_Ger._ zwie-]

twibête adj. _subject to double compensation_, LL.

twibill n. _(two-edged) axe_, Æ.

twibille _double-edged_, WW 141^27.

twiblêoh _twice-dyed, double-dyed_, CP.

twibôte (adj. and adv.) = twibête

twibrowen (y) _twice-brewed_, #Lcd# 45b.

-twicce (æ) v. angel-t.

twiccen = twicen

twiccere m. _one who divided up the food in a monastery_, WW 127^33.

twiccian _to pluck, gather_: _catch hold of_. ['_tweak_']

twi-cen, -cene, -cyne (y^1) f. _junction of roads_.

twicere = twiccere

twidæglic (â, y) _lasting two days_, BH 350^32.

twid¯æl m. _double proportion (two-thirds)_, #Lcd#.

twid¯ælan _to divide into two_: _differ_, #Sc#.

twidêagod _twice dyed_, OEG 1060.

-twidig v. lang-t.

twie- = twi-, twy-

twi-ecge, -ecgede _two-edged_.

twîendlîce _doubtingly_, #Guth# 70. [twêon]

±twi-feald (Æ), -fald (CP) _two-fold, double, ambiguous_, Æ, CP.

±twifealdan (y^1, y^2) _to double_, Æ.

twifealdlic (a) adj. _twofold, double_. adv. -lîce.

twifealdnes f. _duplicity_, CP (ie).

twifêre _accessible by two ways_, WW 194^30.

twiferl¯æcan (y) _to dissociate_, #Sc# 68^8.

twifête (eo, y) _two-footed_, Æ.

twifeðerede _as if with two wings, forked_, #ÆGr# 288^11.

twifingre (y) _two fingers thick_, LL 110[49,3].

twifyldan = twifealdan

twifyrclede _two-forked, divided into two_, #ÆGr# 288^10 (y^1, e^2).

twifyrede _two furrowed_, #ÆGr# 288^11.

twig n. _'twig,' branch, sprout, shoot, small tree_, Æ, CP.

twig- = twi-

twiga = (1) twig; (2) tuwa

twig¯ærede _cloven_, #ÆGr# 288^10 (y).

twîgan = twêogan, twêon

twigea = tuwa

twigedêagod = twidêagod

twigilde (adj. adv. and ? sb.) _paying double, liable to a double
fine_, LL.

twîh num. (acc.) only in phrase 'mid unc twîh' _between us two_, #Gen#
2253. [cp. _Goth._ tweihnai]

twiheafdede _double-headed_, #ÆGr# (y).

twiheolor f. _balance_, Cp 140#b#.

twihinde == twihynde

twi-hîwe (êo), -hîwede _of two colours or shapes_.

twihîwian _to dissimulate_, #Sc# 44^8.

twihlidede _having two openings_, #ÆGr# 288^6 (y).

twihwêole _two-wheeled_, #Lcd#.

twihwyrft '_bilustris_,' OEG 2513.

twihynde I. _having_ 'wergild' _of 200 shillings_. II. _a_ 'wergild' _of
200 shillings_, LL.

twihyndeman m. _man of the_ 'twihynde' _class_, LL 601[87,4].

twiicce = twiecge

twilæpped _with two lappets_, WW 153^17.

twilafte _two-edged_, WW 194^35.

twilîbrocen _woven of threads of two colours_? TC 537^23. [twilic]

twilic _double, woven of double thread_, #Gl#.

twîlic = twêolic

twimylt _twice melted_, OEG 4462.

twîn I. n. _double thread, twist_, _'twine,' linen-thread_, CP: _fine
linen_, (_byssus_). II. = twêon II.

twinclian _to 'twinkle,' wink_, CP.

twinebbe having two faces, GPH 397^448 (y).

twînen _of linen_, OEG.

twing? sb. _cluster_, #HGl# 496.

twingan v. tringan.

twînigend- = twêonigend-

twinihte _two days old_.

±twinn _twin, double, two by two_.

+twinn m. _twin_. pl. _twins, triplets_.

+twinnes (y) f. junction, A 8·331^35.

twînung = twêonung

twînwyrm, m. _'buprestis,' small insect_, WW 122^27.

twio == tweo

twir¯æde (io, y) _uncertain_: _disagreeing_.

twir¯ædnes (y^1, e^2) f. _disagreement, discord, sedition_, Æ.

+twis _having the same parents_, #Gl#.

+twisa m. _twin_, Æ.

twisceatte adv. _to the extent of a double payment_, LL 84[68,1].

twiscyldig _liable to a double penalty_, LL 90#h#.

twiseht _disunited, discordant_, #Sc# 192^13 (y).

twisehtan _to disagree_, #Lcd# 3·204^24 (y)? ANS 125·56^295.

twisehtnes f. _dissension, disagreement_, #Sc# 6^12.

twiseltôð _with forked teeth_? WW 108^15.

twisla m. _confluence, junction_, KC 5·198^32.

twisled _branched, forked_.

twislian _to fork, divide into two_, KC.

twisliht _forked, branched_, KC.

twislung f. _division, partition_, #Lcd# 3·436^3.

twisnæcce _double-pointed, cloven_, #ÆGr# 288^11.

twisnêse _double-pointed, cloven_, GPH 393^73.

twispr¯æc f. _double speech, deceit, detraction_.

twispr¯æce _double-tongued, deceitful, detracting_, Æ.

twispr¯æcnes (y) f. _double speech, detraction_.

twisprecan _to murmur_, NG.

twispunnen _twice-spun_, CP 83^23.

-twist v. candel-, mæst-t.

twistrenge _two-stringed_, #ÆGr# 288^10.

twitælged _double-dyed_, #Gl, VPs#.

twi-ðrâwen, -ðr¯æwen _twice thrown or twisted, twice woven_, CP.

twiwa = tuwa

twiw¯æg f. _pair of scales_, WW 194^28.

twiweg m. _junction of two roads_, WW 177^13.

twi-wintre -winter adj. _two years old_, Æ.

twiwyrdig _ambiguous_, AO.

twoelf = twelf

twôgon = ðwôgon pret. pl. of ðwêan.

twuga, twuwa, twuwu = tuwa

twux = tusc  [[headword spelled "tûsc"]]

twy- = twi-

twý = twêo

twýgean = twêogan, twêon I.

twýlic (Æ) = twêolic

twýn == twêon

twýnihte = twânihte

twyspêcnes = twispr¯æcnes

tý pres. 1 sg. of týn.

tyccen = ticcen

tycht-, tyct- = tyht-

týd I. f. = tîd. II. pp. of týn.

týd- = tîd-

tydd- = tîd-, tûd-

týdde I. pret. 3 sg. of týn. II. = tîðde, pret. 3 sg. of tîðian.

týde pret. sg. of týn.

±týdran _to bring forth, produce, beget, propagate_: _be prolific_.
[tûdor]

týdred _provided with offspring_, #PPs# 143^17.

týdrian = (1) tîdrian; (2) týdran

týdriend m. _propagator_, WW 238^22.

týdrung f. _propagation, production_. [tûdor]

týfrian = tîfrian

tyg- = tig-

týg = têag

tyge (i) m. _drawing together, pulling, tug, pull_, Æ: _leading
(water)_: _draught (of water)_: _deduction, inference, statement_, Æ
[têag, tîegan]

tygehôcg (î) m. _hook for pulling_, LL 455[15].

tygehorn (i) m. _cupping-horn_, #Lcd# 46a.

tygel m. _pulling-rope, rein_, _Æ, WW_. ['_tial_']

tygele f. _'murenula,' lamprey_? WW.

tygðian = tîðian

tyhhian = teohhian

týhst pres. 2 sg. of têon.

tyht I. (i) m. _instruction, training, habit_, _Bo_: _going, course,
motion, progress_, _El_: _region_, #Gu# 1255. ['_tight_'; têon] II. m.
_charge, crime_, LL, WW. [têon II.]

±tyhtan I. (i) (+) _to stretch, draw, pull_, A: _invite, incite,
instigate, provoke, talk over, persuade, attract, lead astray, seduce_,
_Æ_: (+) _teach, train_, _PPs_. ['_tight_'; têon I.] II. _to accuse_.
[têon II.]

tyhtbysig (i) _involved in accusations, of bad reputation_, v. LL 2·305.

tyhten f. _incitement, excitement_, #Gl#. [têon I.]

tyhtend m. _inciter, instigator_.

tyhtendlic (i) _persuading, hortatory_, Æ.

tyhtere (i) m. _inciter, enticer_, WW.

tyhting (i) f. _incitement, impulse, instigation, exhortation,
suggestion, instruction, advice_, Æ: _enticement, allurement_, _Æ_.
['_tihting_']

tyhtle (i) f. _accusation, suit, charge_, AO. [têon II.]

tyhtlian (i) _to accuse, charge_, LL.

tyhtnes (i) f. _inward impulse, instinct, conviction_, WW.

týhð pres. 3 sg. of têon.

tyl == til

tyldsyle f. _tent_, WW 187^4. [teld]

tylg, tylgest v. tulge.

-tyllan v. for-t.

tým = têam

tyma = tama

týma = tîma

týman (Æ) = tîeman

tymb- = timb-

tymp- = timp-

  [[Printed on one line:
  tymb-, tymb- = timb-, timp-]]

±týn I. _to instruct, teach_, _Æ, AO_. II. (Æ) = tîen

týn- = tîen-

±týnan I. _to hedge in, fence, enclose, shut_, _BH, LkL, LL, MkL_.
['_tine_'] II. = têonan

tyncen n. _bladder_? AO 72^30.

tynder (e, i, u) f. _'tinder,' fuel_, _Bo, Sc_; Æ: _cautery_. [tyndan]
  [[under "-tendan"]]

tyndercynn n. _combustible_, WW.

tyndig = tindig

tyndre, tyndren = tynder

+týne n. _entrance, court_, #PPs# 115^8.

±tynge I. adj. _fluent, eloquent_. II. adv. (also -lîce) _courteously_,
OEG 62853.

+tyngnes (i) f. _fluency, eloquence_, Æ, CP.

tyntreg = tintreg

týr == tîr

tyr- = tir-

-tyran (= ie) v. be-t.

tyrdelu, tyrdlu npl. _droppings, small pieces of excrement_, _Lcd_.
['_treddle_']

týrende _having watery eyes_, _Lcd_ 1·72. ['_tear_']

tyrewa = tyrwa

tyrf v. turf.

+tyrfan _to strike, afflict_, GD 29^9. [torfian]
  [[headword spelled "tôrfian"]]

tyrfhaga f. _hoe, mattock_, Ln 17^2.

týrgan = têorian

týriâca m. _(treacle), sovereign remedy_. [_L._ theriacum; _Gk._
+thêriakos+]

týrian = têorian

tyrnan _to turn, move round, revolve_, Æ. [_L._ tornare]

tyrngeat n. _turnstile_, KC 3·405^4.

tyrning (u) f. _turning round, rotation_, OEG: _rotundity, roundness_,
OEG: _crookedness, deceit_, OEG 56^86.

tyro = teoru

tyrð pres. 3 sg. of teran.

tyrwa m., tyrwe f. _'tar,' resin_, Æ. [= teoru]

tyr-wan, -wian (e, i) _to harass, vex_, _LPs_. ['_tar_']

tyrwian I. _to 'tar,'_ B 295. II. = tyrwan

tysca m. _buzzard_, WW 259^12.

tyslian _to put on_, CM 260.

tyslung f. _dressing_.

tysse f. _coarse cloth_. [_OHG._ zussa]

týtan _to sparkle, shine_, DD 45.

tytt = titt

týð == tîð

týw- = tîw-




=Ð=


ðâ I. adv. and conj. _then, at that time_, _Æ, AO, CP_: _after that
time, thereupon_, _AO, Jul_: _when, at the time that, whilst, during_,
_AO, B, Bl_: _there, where_, #Chr#: _seeing that, inasmuch as, if, when,
since, as, because_. ðâ ðâ _when_. ðâ...ðâ _then...when_. ðâ hwîle ðe
_while, whilst, so long as_. ðâ gîet v. ðâgîet. ['_tho_'] II. asf. and
nap. of sê. ðâ ðe _which_.

ðaca I. (±) m. _roof, covering_. II. gp. of ðæc.

±ðaccian _to clap, pat, stroke, touch gently_, _CP, Shr_: _smack, beat_,
GD. ['_thack_']

ðacele = ðæcele

ðacian _to thatch_, LL 454[10].

ðacum dp. of ðæc.

ðadder (_JnL_ 7^35) = ðider

ðæc I. (ea) n. _covering, roof of a building_, _Chr, MtR, PPs_:
'_thatch_,' _Æ, BH_. ['_thack_'] II. = ðec pron. (das. of ðu).

ðæccille (N) = ðæcele

ðæce f. = ðæc I.

ðæcele (e) f. _torch, lamp, light_. [= fæcele]

ðæcen = ðecen

ðæcile = ðæcele

ðæctigile f. _roof-tile_, Cp 57#i#.

ðæder, ðædres = ðider

ðæderlendisc (MH 178^25n.) = ðiderlêodisc

+ðæf w. g. _agreeing to, consenting to_.

ð¯æf (_JnR_) = ðêof

ðæfet- = ðafet-

ðæge mnp. pron. _they, those, them_, _Lk, Jn_. ['_thaie_']

ðægen == ðegen

ðægn == ðegn

ð¯ægon pret. pl. of ðicgan.

ð¯æh (N) = ðêah I. and II.

ðæht (N) == ðeaht

ð¯æm (â, ê) dsmn. and dp. of sê pron. be ð¯æm, on ð¯æm _thereon,
therein_. êac ð¯æm _in addition to this, besides this, also, moreover_.
¯ær ð¯æm ðe _before_. æfter ð¯æm _after, later, next, after that
(fashion)_. for ð¯æm (ðe) _therefore, on that account, for that reason,
because_. on ð¯æm ðe _in this, in that_.

ð¯æn = ðegn

ð¯ænan _to moisten_, #Lcd#.

ðæncan = ðencan

ðæncung = ðancung

ðæne = ðone asm. of sê.

ðænnan = ðennan

ðænne = ðonne

ð¯ær (ê) adv. and conj. _'there,' thither, yonder_: _where, whither_:
_then_: _when_: _though, if, so far as, whilst, provided that_: _in that
respect_. ð¯ær ð¯ær _where, wherever_. ð¯ær...of _therefrom_. ð¯ær wið
_in regard to that_.

ð¯æra gp. of sê, sêo, ðæt.

ð¯ærâbûtan _about that place_, Æ.

ð¯æræfter adv. _thereafter_, CP.

ð¯æræt _thereat_, BH 282^6.

ðæran _to dry_, HL 13·103.

ð¯ær-big, -bie adv. _'thereby,' thus_, _CP_ 42, 43^14.

ð¯ærbinnan (o^3) adv. _therein_, Æ, AO.

ð¯ærbufan _besides that_, CP.

ð¯ære gdf. of sê.

ðærf = (1) ðearf; (2) ðeorf

ðærf- = ðearf-

ð¯ærforan conj. _before that_, Æ.

ðærh = ðurh

ð¯ærin _'therein,' wherein_, _Met_.

ð¯ærinne (ê) _therein_, _CP_. ['_thereinne_']

ðærle = ðearle  [[form of "ðearl"?]]

ð¯ærmid adv. _therewith_, Æ, LL.

ð¯ærnêhst _next to that_, LL 280[2,1].

ðærnian _to lose_? #Chr# 1119 (v. MF 174).

ð¯ærof adv. _'thereof,' of that_, _Lcd_.

ð¯ærofer _over or above that_, _CP_. ['_thereover_']

ð¯æron adv. _therein_, _Æ, CP_: '_thereon_,' _Bl_: _thereinto, thereof_.

ð¯æronbûtan = ð¯æreâbûtan  [[headword spelled "ð¯ærâbûtan"]]

ð¯ærongên adv. _on the contrary_, W 248^21.

ð¯æronuppan adv. _thereupon_, Æ.

ð¯ærrihte, ðærrihtes (â, ê) adv. _thereupon, forthwith, instantly,
immediately, straightway_, Æ.

ðærsc pret. 3 sg. of ðerscan.

ðærscan (NG) = ðerscan

ðærsc-wald, -wold = ðerscold

ðærst = dærst

ð¯ærtô adv. _'thereto,' to it, to that place_, _Æ_: _besides_, _Æ, BH_:
_for that purpose_, _Æ_: _belonging to_, _Æ_.

ð¯ærtôêacan adv. _besides, in addition to that_, Æ.

ð¯ærtôgêanes adv. _on the contrary, in opposition thereto_, Æ.

ð¯ærð¯ær adv. _wherever_, Æ.

ð¯ærunder adv. _beneath_, _CP_. ['_thereunder_']

ð¯æruppan _thereon_, Æ.

ð¯ærût, ð¯ærûte adv. _outside, without_, _AO, CP_. ['_thereout_']

ð¯ærwið adv. _against, in exchange for_, Æ: '_therewith_,' _Bo_.

ð¯ærymbe adv. _thereabout, on that point_, W 273^1.

ð¯ærymbûtan _thereabouts_.

ðæs I. adv. (gs. of ðæt) _afterwards_, _AO_: _thence_: _accordingly,
according as_, _Æ, BH, Bo_: _therefore, because_, _CP_. ðæs ðe _since,
after, afterwards; therefore, wherefore, because, that; as, according
as; provided_; _(to express proportion) the_. tô ðæs _to that point,
to that degree_. ['_thes_'] II. gs. of sê and ðæt.

±ðæsl¯æcan _to agree with, be fitting, suitable_, #Gl#.

ðæslic I. adj. _suitable, congruous_, Æ: _harmonious_: _fair, elegant_.
II. = ðyllic

ðæslîce adv. _opportunely, suitably, aptly, after this manner,
similarly, thus_.

ðæslicnes f. _fitness, convenience_, Æ.

ð¯æsma m. _leaven, yeast_, RB 10^18.

ð¯æsternes = ðêosternes  [[variant of "ðêostornes"?]]

ðæsðe = ðæs ðe v. ðæs.

ðæt I. conj. and adv. _'that,' so that, in order that, after that, then,
thence_. ðæt ðe _that_. II. nas. of sê, ðæt.

ðætte I. pron. _which, that which_. II. conj. _that, so that, in order
that_. tô ðon ðætte _so that_. [ðæt ðe]

+ðafa m. _favourer, supporter, helper_, CP.

ðafetere, ðafettere m. _one who acquiesces in, or condones, what is
wrong_, CP.

+ðafettan (æ, ea) _to consent_, EHy 6^27.

±ðafian (ea) _to allow, suffer, endure, permit, tolerate_, _BH, LL_; CP:
_approve, consent to, submit to_, AO, CP. ['_i-thave_']

ðaforlic = ðaroflic, ðearflic  [["ðaroflic" redirected to "ðearflic"]]

+ðafsum _consenting, agreeing_, NG.

+ðafsumnes f. _consent, agreement_, NG.

±ðafung f. _permission, consent_, Æ.

ðâg, ðâh pret. 3 sg. of ðicgan, ðêon.

ðage = ðæge

ðâgên = ðe âgên _who again_, #Bl# 167^6.

ðâgîet, ðâgýt adv. _still_: _yet_.

ðâgon pret. pl. of ðicgan.

ðâh == ðêah

ðâm = ð¯æm

ðamettan _to clap (the hands)_? #APs# 97^8.

ðan = ðon adv.

ðân I. adj. _moist, irrigated_, WW. II. n. _irrigated land_. [ðînan]
III. (LWS) = ð¯æm

ðanan = ðanon

ðanc (o) m. _thought, reflection, sentiment, idea_, _An, PPs_; Æ: _mind,
will_: _grace, mercy, favour, pardon_, _Gen, PPs_: _thanks, gratitude_,
_B, Bo, CP, Gen, RB_; AO (ðonc), CP: _pleasure, satisfaction_, CP:
_reward, recompense_, #Gu# 442. Gode ð. _thanks (be) to God_. Godes
ðances _through the mercy of God_. Drihtnes ðances _according to the
will of the Lord_. mînes ðances _by my favour, of my own will_. on ð.
_willingly, gladly_. an ðance _acceptable, pleasant_, AO. dêofla ðonces
_in honour of devils_, AO. ['_thank_']

+ðanc mn. _thought, mind_, _Lk_. ['_i-thank_']

ðances adv. _thankfully, gladly_: _voluntarily, gratis_, _BC, Bo, Chr_.
[v. '_thank_']

ðancful adj. (+) _thoughtful, ingenious, clever_: '_thankful_,' _Bl_:
_contented, satisfied_, _BH, WW_: _pleasing, agreeable_, _A_:
_energetic, spirited_. adv. -lîce '_thankfully_,' _ÆL_ 2·198.

ðanchycgende _thoughtful_, B 2235.

±ðancian (o) (w. g. thing and d. pers.) _to thank, give thanks_, _Æ, B,
Bo, G, Sat_; CP: _recompense, reward_: (w. i.) _rejoice_. ['_thank_']

+ðancmetian _to think over, deliberate_, #Gen# 1917. [metgian]

ðanc-metung (o^1, eo^2), -metegung f. _deliberation, thought_, BH 88^4
(v.l.).

±ðancol _thoughtful, mindful_: _prudent, wise_: (+) _desirous_: (+)
_suppliant_.

ðancolmôd _thoughtful, considerate, prudent, wise, attentive_.

ðanc-snotor, -snottor ¶ _wise, prudent, ingenious_.

ðancung f. _'thanking,' thanksgiving_, _Æ, AO, JnL_.

ðanc-weorð, -weorðlic (u^2, y^2) _thankworthy, acceptable_: _thankful,
grateful_: _memorable_. adv. -lîce _gladly, willingly_, CP.

ðancword n. _thanks_, #Wid# 137.

ðanc-wurð, -wyrð(e) == ðancweorð

ðand pret. 3 sg. of ðindan.

ðane (#KGl#) = ðone

ðanêcan (o^1) adv. _whenever, as often as_.

+ðang = +ðanc

ðânian (¯æ) _to be or become moist, moisten_, WW.

ðanne = ðonne

ðanon (CP), ðanone (o^1, a^2) adv. _from that time or place, thence,
away_, _B, Bl, Mt, Jud_: _whence, from which, of which_, _CP, PPs_.
ðanon...ðanon _thence...whence_: _then, thereupon, henceforth_: _by
which, through that_. ['_thenne_']

ðanonforð adv. _after that, then, thenceforward_, W.

ðanonweard adv. _departing thence_, #Bo# 103^7.

ðanun = ðanon

ðar- = ðear-, ðer-

ðâr == ð¯ær

ðâra I. = ð¯ær. II. gp. of sê, sêo, ðæt.

ðarigend = derigend

  [[No independent entry; see "derian" and "deriendlic".]]

ðas = ðæs gsmn. of sê.

ðâs I. afs. and nap. of ðês. ['_those_'] II. nap. of ðâw = ðêow

ðassum (N) = ðissum, dmns. of ðês.

ðat = ðæt

ðâðâ v. ðâ.

ðâw I. = ðêaw I. II. = ðêow

+ðâwenian = +ðw¯ænan

ðâwian _to 'thaw,'_ _Lcd_ 3·274.

ðe I. rel. pron. (when govd. by a prep. the prep. follows) _who, which,
that_. ðe is often associated by attraction with pers. pronouns. ðe ic
_I_. ðe we _we_. ðe...his _whose_. sê ðe his _he whose_. II. conj.
_when_: _or_. hw¯æðer ðe...ðe _whether...or_. ðe...ðe _the...or,
either...or_: (= ðâ) _then_: (= ð¯ær) _where_, #El# 717: (with
comparatives) _than_. III. art. _the_ (indecl.), #Chr# 963#e# and late.
IV. particle added to ðêah, for ð¯æm, ðæs, etc., without affecting their
meaning [_Goth._ ðau] V. das. of ðu.

ðê = ðý

ðêa (NG) = ðêow

ðeac = ðæc

ðeaca = ðaca

ðêada (#VPs#) = ðêoda gp. of ðêod I.

ðêadôm (_DR_) = ðêowdôm

ðêaf (_NG_) = ðêof

ðeafian = ðafian

ðeah pret. 3 sg. of ðicgan.

ðêah I. (ê) conj. and adv. _'though,' although, even if, that, however,
nevertheless, yet, still_, _Bl, Bo_; CP. ð. ðe _although_. swâ ð.
_nevertheless, yet_. ð. hwæðere v. ðêahhwæðere. II. pret. 3 sg. of ðêon.

ðêah-hwæðere, -hweðre adv. _yet, moreover, however, nevertheless, but_,
_Bl, CP_. swâ ð. _yet, nevertheless_. ['_thoughwhether_']

ðeaht n. _counsel, advice, design_, Æ. [ðencan]

+ðeaht fn. _thought, consideration, counsel, advice_: _design,
contrivance, scheme_, Æ, CP: _council, assembly_, Æ.

+ðeahta m. _adviser, counsellor_, WW 99^5.

ðeahte pret. 3 sg. of ðeccan.

+ðeahtend m. _counsellor_, WW.

+ðeahtendlic _deliberative_, LL 12.

±ðeahtere m. _counsellor_, BH.

±ðeahtian _to ponder, consider, deliberate upon, take counsel_, Æ, CP.

±ðeahtung (æ) f. _counsel, consultation_.

ðêahðe = ðêah ðe

ðêana adv. _nevertheless, yet_. swâ ð. _however_.

ðêara = ðâra, gmfp. of ðæt.

ðearf I. (a, e, y) f. _need, necessity, want, behoof_, _B, Lcd_; CP. tô
ðearfe _as is needed, according to what is needed_: _benefit, profit,
advantage, utility_, Æ: _trouble, hardship, privation, distress,
danger_: _duty, employment_. ['_tharf_'; ðurfan] II. = ðeorf. III. pres.
3 sg. of ðurfan.

ðearfa (æ, eo) I. m. _poor man, pauper, beggar_, Æ, CP. II. _destitute,
poor, needy_, Æ.

ðearfan = ðurfan

ðearfednes f. _poverty_, BH.

ðearf-end, -igend (#Bk#) (o) m. _poor man_.

ðearfende _needy, in want, poor_, CP.

ðearfendlic _needy, poor, miserable_.

ðearfendnes = ðearfednes

ðearfian _to starve, be in need, want_, #PPs# 71^13. [_Ger._ darben]

+ðearfian _to impose necessity_, B 1103.

ðearflêas adj. _without cause or need_, Æ. adv. -lêase.

ðearflic _profitable, useful, convenient, necessary_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

ðearflicnes f. _want, poverty_.

ðearl adj. _vigorous, strong, severe, strict, harsh, violent, heavy,
excessive_. adv. ðearle, Æ, CP.

ðearlic _severe, cruel, harsh, violent, grievous_. adv. -lîce, CP.

ðearlmôd ¶ _stern, severe, violent, strong, mighty_.

ðearlwîs _strict, severe, relentless_, CP.

ðearlwîslic _severe_, GD. adv. -lîce, CP.

ðearlwîsnes f. _severity, strictness_, BH, GD.

ðearlwýs- = ðearlwîs-

ðearm (a) m. _gut, entrail_, _Æ, Gl_. ['_tharm_']

ðearm(ge)wind n. _windpipe_ (= windðearm), OET 509 (v. ES 43·332).

ðearmgyrd m. _belly-band, girdle, belt_, WW 220^1.

ðearsc = ðærsc pret. 3 sg. of ðerscan.

ðearsm (BH 426^24) = ðrosm

ðêat pret. 3 sg. of ðêotan.

ðêatan = ðêotan

ðêater m? _theatre_, AO 154^2.

ðêatscipe (N) = ðêodscipe

ðêaw I. m. _usage, custom, habit, conduct, disposition_, _AO, B, JnL_;
CP: (in pl.) _virtues_, _(good) manners, morals, morality_, Æ, CP.
['_thew_'] II. = ðêow

+ðeawe _customary, usual_, GD.

ðêawfæst _decorous, moral, virtuous, honourable_.

ðêawfæstlîce _correctly_, ÆL 5^222.

ðêawfæstnes f. _obedience, discipline_, Æ.

ðêawful _moral, virtuous_, W 250^4.

ðêawian = ðêowian

ðêawlêas _ill-mannered_, Æ.

ðêawlic _customary_, Æ: _decent, moral_, Æ: _figurative_. adv. -lîce.

+ðêawod _well-mannered, moral_, Æ.

ðêb- (#Gl#) = ðêof-

ðec das. of ðu.

ðeccan (±) _to cover, cover over, conceal_, _B, Gen, Lcd, PPs_: (¶)
_swallow up_? ['_thatch_']

ðeccbryce m. _tile_, #HGl# 459^42.

ðeccend m. _protector, defender_, #PPs# 70.

ðecele = ðæcele

ðecen f. _thatch, tile, covering, roof_: (fig.) _house_, Æ. [ðeccan]

ðecest pres. 2 sg, of ðeccan.

ðecgan I. _to consume_, #Lcd#. II. obl. case of sb? _receptacle_? (BT)
or = ðeccan? (Lieb.), LL 454[10].

+ðêd = +ðêod

ðêde pret. of ðêon (ðýwan).

ðêf = ðêof

ðêfanðorn, ðefonðorn (#APs# 57^19), ðêfeðorn = ðýfeðorn

ðêfel = ðýfel

ðefian _to pant, heave, palpitate_, #HGl#.

ðeften (#HGl# 461^56) = ðyften

ðêfð = ðîefð

ðegan _to serve_, #Gu# 140.

ðegen I. = ðegn. II. pp. of ðicgan.

ðegen- = ðegn-, ðên-

ðegeð 3 p. sg. pres. of ðecgan.

ðegh (#Gl#) = ðêoh

ðegin = ðegn

ðegn (æ) [v. LL 456; 2·680] m. _servant, minister, retainer, vassal,
follower, disciple_, _BH, Bl, Bo, G, Gl_; AO, CP: _freeman, master
(as opposed to slave)_: _courtier, noble (official, as distinguished
from hereditary)_, _Æ, LL, WW_: (¶) _military attendant, warrior, hero_,
_AO, B_. ['_thane_']

ðegn-, v. also ðên-.

ðegnboren (ðegen-) _well-born_, LL.

ðegngylde n. _legal money value of a thane_, W 162^10.

ðegnhyse m. _attendant, retainer_, WW.

±ðegnian (æ, ên) (w. d.) _to serve, minister, wait on_, _B, BH, Bl, G_;
CP: _supply another with anything_: _perform (an office)_. ['_theine_']

ðegnlagu f. _rights, duties or privileges of a thane_, LL, W.

ðegnlic _noble, brave, loyal_, Æ. adv. -lice.

ðegnr¯æden f. _thaneship, service_.

ðegnriht n. _rights or privileges of a thane_, LL.

ðegnscipe m. _thaneship, service, duty_: _ability_, AO: _manliness,
valour_, AO: _body of retainers_.

ðegnscolu f. _band of vassals_, WW 371^7.

ðegnsorh f. _sorrow for loss of thanes_, B 131.

ðegnung == ðên-ung, -ing

ðegnweorud n. _band of followers_, #Cr# 751.

ðegnwer m. _thane's_ 'wergild,' LL.

ðego = ðegu

ðêgon = ð¯ægon pret. pl. of ðicgan.

-ðegu v. bêah-, wîn-ð.  [[under "bêagðegu"]]

ðeh (A) = ðec

ðêh I. = ðêoh I. II. (A, K) = ðêah

ðeht == ðeaht

ðel, ðell n. _board, plank_, _(metal) plate_. [_Ger._ diele]

ðelbrycg f. _bridge of planks_, Ct.

ðelcræft = ðylcræft

ðellfæsten n. _fastness made of planks, ship, ark_, #Gen# 1482.

ðellian = ðillian

-ðelu v. buruh-, benc-ð. ['_theal_']  [[headword spelled "bencðel"]]

ðêm = ð¯æm

ðên == ðegn

±ðencan I. _to 'think' ('i-thenche'), imagine, think of, meditate,
reason, consider_, _Æ, B, Bo, Bl, LL_; AO, CP: _remember, recollect_,
_CP, RB_: _intend, purpose, attempt, devise_, _B, Bl_: _wish, desire,
long for_. [ðanc] II. (rarely) = ðyncan

ðencendlic _thoughtful_, MFH 174.

ðende = ðenden

ðênde = ðêonde

ðenden conj. and adv. _meanwhile, while, as long as, until_.

ðene = ðone

ðênest f. _service, entertainment_, #Chr# 1054#d#.

ðênestmann (êo^1) m. _serving-man, retainer_, #Chr# 656#e#.

ðênestre f. _servant, handmaiden_, OEG 1358.

ðeng = ðegn

ðengel ¶ m. _prince, king, lord, ruler_.

ðenian = ðennan

ðênian (Æ, CP) = ðegnian

ðênigmann = ðêningmann

ðêningfæt n. _serving-vessel_, RB.

ðêninggâst m. _ministering spirit_, Æ.

ðêninghûs n. _workshop_, GPH 394.

ðêningmann m. _serving man_, Æ, CP.

ðênisc _(religious) service_, EC 265?

ðennan (±) _to stretch, extend_, _Lcd_ (æ), _PPs_: _prostrate_: _exert
oneself_: _spread the fame of, magnify_, OEG. ['_thin_']

ðenning f. _stretching, extension_, A 11·172.

+ðênsum _obedient, helpful, useful_, Æ. [ðegen]

ðênung (ðegn-) _service, ministry_, _Bl, Bo_; CP: (pl.) _attendants,
retinue_: _use_: _church service, mass-book_: _meal-time, meal_, Æ.
['_theining_']

ðênungbôc f. _book for divine service, mass-book_, Æ.

ðênungwerod n. _body of serving-men_, MH 218^12.

ðêo I. = ðêow m. II. ds. of ðêoh. III. = sêo II. IV. pres. 1 sg. of
ðêon.

ðêod f. _people, nation, tribe_, _Chr, Lk_; AO, CP; Mdf: _region,
country, province_, _Bo_: _men, war-troop, retainers_: (in pl.)
_Gentiles_, _Æ, MtR_: _language_. ['_thede_']

+ðêod pp. of +ðêon, ðýwan.

±ðêodan _to join, associate (with)_, _attach or subject oneself to_, Æ,
CP: (+) _engage in_: (+) _translate_. ð. fram _separate_.

ðêodbealu ¶ n. _public calamity_.

ðêodbûende ¶ mp. _earth-dwellers, human beings_.

ðêodcwên f. _queen, empress_, #El# 1156.

ðêodcyning m. _monarch_: (¶) _God_.

ðêode pret. 3 sg. of ðêon.

+ðêode n. _speech, language_, AO, CP: _nation_: _translation_, Æ.

ðêodegsa m. _general terror_, #Cr# 834.

ðêoden m. _chief of a tribe, ruler, prince, king_: _God, Christ_. [ðêod;
cp. dryhten from dryht]

ðêodend m. _translator_, OEG 15^6.

+ðêodendlic _copulative_, #ÆGr# 259^1.

ðêodengedâl n. _separation from one's lord (through his death)_, #Gu#
1324.

ðêodenhold ¶ _faithful to one's lord_.

ðêodenlêas _without a ruler or chief, lordless_, B 1103.

ðêoden-mâðm (-mâdm) m. _treasure given by a prince_, #Gen# 409.

ðêodenstôl ¶ m. _throne_.

ðêodeorðe f. _inhabited earth_, W 240^15.

ðêodfêond m. _public enemy_, W.

ðêodfruma m. _prince, ruler_, #Met# 29^94.

ðêodgestrêon n. _people's treasure, great possession_, B 44; 1218.

ðêodguma ¶ m. _man, warrior_.

ðêodhere m. _national army, host_, #Gen# 2160.

-ðêodig, -ðêodig-lic, -nes v. el-ð.

ðêodisc I. ¶ n. _speech, language_. II. adj. _Gentile_, OEG 8^350.
[_Ger._ deutsch]

+ðêodlæcan _to adhere, cleave to_, #LPs# 24^21.

ðêodland n. _inhabited land, district, country, empire_: _the
continent_.

ðêodlic _national_, #ÆGr# 65^6.

+ðêodlic _social, intimate_.

ðêodlîcetere m. _public deceiver, arch-hypocrite_, W 54^18.

ðêodloga m. _arch-liar_, W.

ðêodmægen n. _troop, host_, #Ex# 342.

±ðêodnes f. (+) _joining, suture_: _conjunction, association_: (+)
_conjugation_, #ÆGr#: (+) _translation_.

±ðêodr¯æden f. _intercourse, fellowship_, Æ.

ðêodsceaða m. _public pest, criminal_.

ðêodscipe m. I. _nation, people, community, population_. II.
_connection, association_: _discipline, training, teaching, instruction,
testimony_: _learning, erudition_, CP: _administration, law, authority_:
_conduct_.

ðêodstefn m. _tribe, nation_, #PPs# 83^10.

+ðêodsumnes f. _agreement_, LkL p8^1.

ðêodðrêa f? m? _general distress_, B 178.

ðêodwiga m. _great warrior_, #Pa# 38.

ðêodwita m. _learned man_: _senator_, Æ.

ðêodwundor n. _great wonder_, #Cr# 1155.

ðêof I. (¯æ, êa) m., _criminal_, _'thief,' robber_, _G, LL, OET_. II. f.
_theft_.

ðêofdenn n. _robber's cave_, KC 3·15^28.

ðêofend (only found in pl.?) f. _thieving, theft_.

ðêofeðorn = ðýfeðorn

ðêoffeng m. _seizure of thieves by an owner on his own land_: _right to
fines payable on conviction for theft_? TC (v. BT).

ðêofgild n. _payment for theft_, LL.

±ðêofian _to 'thieve,' steal_, _LL, TC_.

ðêofmann m. _robber, brigand_, AO ÆP.

ðêofsceaða m. _robber_, v. ANS 129·24n6.

ðêofsceolu = ðêofscolu

ðêofscip n. _pirate-ship_, #Gl#.

ðêofscolu f. _band of robbers_, #Bo# 33^10.

ðêofscyldig f. _guilty of theft_, LL 226´.

ðêofslege m. _slaying of a thief_, LL 97.

ðêofsliht m. _slaying of a thief_, LL 104#b#.

ðêofstolen ptc. _stolen_, LL.

ðêofð = ðîefð

ðêofung f. _thieving_, NC 327.

ðêofunt (NG) = ðêofend

ðêofwracu f. _punishment for theft_, LL 174.

ðêoging f. _increase, profit_: _advance, progress_.

ðêoh I. (ê) n. (gs. ðêos, ds. ðêo; gp. ðêona) _'thigh,' hip_, _AO, CP,
Gl, Lcd, MH_. II. imperat. of ðêon.

ðêohece m. _pain in the thigh_, #Lcd#.

ðêohgel¯æte n. _thigh-joint_, #Lcd#.

ðêohgeweald np. '_genitalia_,' #Lcd#.

ðêohhweorfa m. _knee-cap_, #Lcd#.

ðêohscanca m. _thigh-bone_, #Lcd#, WW.

ðêohseax (æ^2) n. _hip-sword, short sword, dirk_, WW.

ðêohwræc m. _pain in the thigh_, #Lcd# 1·354^19.

±ðêon I. (sv^1,3) _to thrive, prosper, flourish, grow, increase, ripen_,
_Æ, B, Bl, Lk, Sc_: _be profitable, to become or be great, excel_, CP:
_lengthen (of days)_. ['_thee_,' '_i-thee_'] II. (wv.) = ðýwan. III.
(wv.) ¶ _to perform, do_.

ðêona v. ðêoh.

ðeonan = ðanon

ðêonde pres. ptc. of ðêon I.

ðeonen = ðanon

ðêonest = ðênest

ðêonýd = ðêownýd

ðêor m? _inflammation_? #Lcd#.

ðêorâdl f. _inflammation_? _blistering heat_? #Lcd#.

ðeorcung = deorcung

ðêordrenc m. _a drink used for inflammation_, #Lcd#.

ðeorf (æ, e, o) I. adj. _unleavened_, _Æ, G, WW_: _fresh_? _skim_?
(_milk_), #Lcd#. II. n. _unleavened bread_, Æ. ['_tharf_']

ðeorfa = ðearfa

ðeorfdagas mp. _days of unleavened bread_, A 8·330.

ðeorfhlâf m. _loaf of unleavened bread_, Æ.

ðeorfling m. _unleavened bread_, WW.

ðeorfnes f. _freedom from leaven, purity_, Æ.

ðeorfsymbel n. _feast of unleavened bread_, Æ.

ðêorgerid n. _inflammation_? #Lcd# 187a.

ðeorscwold = ðerscold

ðêorwærc m. _inflammatory disease_? #Lcd# 45b.

ðêorwenn f. _inflammatory tumour or blister, carbuncle_, #Lcd# 123a.

ðêorwyrm m. _inflammatory (parasitic) worm_, #Lcd# 45a.

ðêorwyrt f. _ploughman's spikenard, fleabane_, #Lcd#.

ðêos I. dem. pron., nom. fem. _this_. v. ðês. II. gs. of ðêoh. III. gs.
of (ðêo =) ðêow.

ðeossa = ðissa

ðeossum = ðisum

ðêoster == ðêostor

ðêostor, ðêostre (îe, î, ý) _dark, gloomy_, _B, BH_: _sad, mournful_.
['_thester_']

ðêostorcofa ¶ m. _dark chamber_.

ðêostorful _dark, dusky_, _Æ, Mt_ (ý). ['_thesterfull_']

ðêostorfulnes (ê, ý) f. _darkness_, OEG.

ðêostorlic _obscure, dark_, _Æ_ (e^2). ['_thesterly_']

ðêostorloca m. _tomb_, #El# 485.

ðêostornes (¯æ, î, ý) f. _darkness_, _AO, Bo_. ['_thesterness_']

ðêostre = ðêostor, ðêostru

ðêostrian _to grow dark, become dim, be eclipsed_, _BH_: (±) _darken,
obscure_, _Bo, Mt_. ['_thester_']

ðêostrig _dark, obscure, blinded_, _GD_ (ý), _Mk_. ['_thestri_']

ðêostru f. (î, îe, ý), ðêostre n. (often in pl.) _darkness, gloom_,
_BH_; Æ. ['_thester_']

ðêostrung f. _twilight, gloom_.

ðeosum = ðissum  [[form of "ðês"]]

+ðêot I. n. _howling_, #Guth# 48^4. II. pres. 3 sg. of +ðêodan.

ðêotan^2 (êa, û) _to roar, howl_, _Æ, Bo, Met_: _sound forth, resound,
murmur_, _WW_. ['_theoten_']

ðêote f. _torrent, fountain, cataract, waterfall_: _conduit, pipe_, Æ.
[ðêotan]

ðêow I. fm. _servant, slave_, _AO, CP, DR, G_. II. adj. _servile_, _Æ,
AO, Bo, W_. ['_theow_']

ðêowa m. (Æ, CP) = ðêow I.

+ðêowa m. _enslaved person_, v. MFH 104.

ðêowæt = ðêowot

ðêowan I. = ðêowian. II. = ðýwan

ðêowatdôm = ðêowotdôm

ðêow-boren, -berde _not free-born, born in servitude_.

ðêowcnapa m. _bondservant_, ÆH 2·510^27.

ðêowdôm m. _slavery, servitude, service, vassalage, subjection_, _Æ,
AO_; CP: _divine service_. ['_theowdom_']

ðêowdômhâd m. _service_, BH 480^10.

ðêowe f. _female slave, handmaiden_, _BH, MtL_ (î). ['_theow_']

ðêowen, ðêowene = ðêowe

ðêowet (Æ) = ðêowot

ðêowetling m. _little servant or slave_, Æ.

ðêowhâd m. _servitude, service_, BH.

ðêowian I. (±) (êa) (w. d.) occl. pret. ðêowde _to serve, minister to,
be subject to_, _Bo, Lk, Mt_ (ê); AO, CP: _enslave, give over into
slavery_, Æ. ['_theow_'] II. = ðýwan I.

ðêowin = ðêowen

ðêowincel (îo) n. _little servant_, CVHy 3^3.

ðêowlic _servile_, #ÆGr# 55^1n.

ðêowne as. of ðêowen.

ðêownýd (e^2) ¶ f. _serfdom, slavery_.

ðêowot n. _service, ministry, servitude, bondage_, Æ, AO, CP.

ðêowotdôm m. _service_, CP.

ðêowotlic _of a slave, servile_, Æ (wt).

ðêowotling (e^2) m. _servant, slave_, Æ.

ðêowotscipe (wt) m. _service_, ÆH 23b^26.

ðêowracian _to threaten, menace_, #SPs# 102^9.

ðêowracu (Æ) = ðêowwracu

+ðêowr¯æden (RB) = ðêodr¯æden

ðêowt == ðêowot

ðêowð = ðêofð, ðîefð

ðêowu = ðêowe

ðêowut = ðêowot

ðêowwracu f. _commination, threat, threatening_, Æ.

ðeox _hunting-spear_, #HGl# 423.

ðêr == ð¯ær

ðeran _to rush_, Cp 150#j#.

ðerc-, ðercs- = ðersc-

ðercan, ðerccan _to 'thrash,' 'thresh,' beat_, _WW_.

ðerexwold = ðerscold

ðerf = ðeorf

ðerflicnes (#KGl#) = ðearflicnes

ðerh (NG) == ðurh

ðêrinne = ð¯ærinne

ðêrrihte = ð¯ærrihte

+ðersc n. _thrashing, beating_, GD.

±ðerscan^3 (a, æ, ea, i, y) _to thresh_, _'thrash,' beat, strike_, _CP,
DR, Sol, WW_.

ðerscel (y) f. _flail_, _WW_. ['_threshel_']

ðerscelflôr f. _threshing-floor_, Mt 3^12.

ðersc-old, -wald, -wold, ðerx(w)old (æ, eo, i, y) m. _'threshold,'
border, limit_, _Æ, Bo, WW_.

ðes = ðæs

ðês (e?) m., ðêos f., ðis n. dem. pron. '_this_.' beforan ðissum, ¯ær
ðissum _before this, formerly_.

ðêster- = ðêostor-

ðêstrian = ðêostrian

ðet = ðæt

ðette = ðætte

ðêw- = ðêow-, ðýw-

ðî = ðý

ðîada (#VPs# 134^15) = ðêoda gp. of ðêod.

+ðian = +ðêon

ðicce I. adj. _'thick,' viscous, solid_, _AO, Bo, Lcd, RB_: _dense,
stiff_, _Bo, CP, Lcd_: _numerous, abundant_, _AO_: _hazy, gloomy_, _Æ,
BH_. II. adv. _thickly, closely_, _Bl, Lcd, WW_: _often, frequently_,
_Gen_ 684.

ðiccet n. _thick bushes, 'thicket,'_ _SPs_. [ðicce]

ðiccian tr., intr. _to thicken_, _Æ, WW_: _crowd together_, _Shr_.
['_thick_']

ðiccnes = ðicnes

ðiccol, ðiccul _fat, corpulent_, WW.

ðicfeald _dense_, OEG 278.

+ðicfyldan _to make dense_, #Gl#.

±ðicgan^5 (and wv.) (a, æ, e, ea) _to take, receive, accept_, _Chr,
Lcd_: _partake of, consume, taste, eat, drink_, _Mk_; AO, CP.

ðiclîce _thickly, often, continually, frequently, in large numbers_, AO.

ðicnes f. _'thickness,' density, viscosity, hardness_, _GD, Lcd, SPs_:
_depth_: _anything thick or heavy (as clouds or rain)_, _LPs, ZDA_:
_thicket_: _darkness_.

ðîdan = ðyddan

ðider (æ, y) adv. _on that side_, _'thither,' whither_, _Æ, BH, Bl_ (y);
AO, CP. hider and ð. _or_. hidres ðidres (ðædres) _hither and thither_,
CP: _where, wherever_.

ðidercyme m. _a coming hither_, NC 327 (late).

ðidergeond _thither_, Æ.

ðiderinn (y^1, y^2) adv. _therein, into that place_.

ðiderlêodisc _to that people, native_, MH 178^25.

ðiderweard, ðiderweardes adv. _'thitherwards,' thither_, _Æ, AO, Bo_.

ðidres = ðider

ðîed- = ðêod-

ðieder (CP) = ðider

ðîef- = ðêof-

ðîefefeoh n. _stolen goods_, LL.

ðîefð (ê, êo, ý) f. '_theft_,' _Lcd_ (ý), _LL_: _stolen goods_, LL
(ðêoft). [ðêof]

+ðiegen = +ðigen

ðîen = ðýwan

ðîende = ðêonde

ðîenen = ðînen

ðienga = ðinga, gp. of ðing.

ðîestr- = ðêostr-

ðîf- = ðîef-, ðýf-

ðigde, ðigede pret. 1, 3 sg. of ðicgan.

ðigen I. f. _receiving, taking (of food or drink)_, _eating_, Æ: _food
or drink_, Æ. [ðicgan] II. pp. of ðêon I. and ðicgan.

ðigeð pres. 3 sg. of ðicgan.

ðignen = ðînen

ðîgon pret. pl. of ðêon I.

ðîhsl = ðîsl

ðihtig = ðyhtig

ðîhð pres. 3 sg. of ðêon I.

ðilc = ðyllic

ðile = ðyle

ðilian (e, y) _to lay with planks, board over_, Æ. [_Ger._ dielen]

ðilic = ðyllic

ðiling f. _boarding, floor_: _table_, GD 97^4.

ðille n. _thin board, plank, flooring_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ diele]

ðillian = ðilian

ðillic = ðyllic

ðimiama m. _incense_, Æ. [_L._ thymiama]

ðîn I. gs. of ðu. II. adj. pron. _'thine,' thy_. III. f. = ðigen

ðînan _to grow moist_, #Lcd# 13b.

ðinc = ðing

ðincan = (1) ðyncan; (2) ðencan

+ðincðo = +ðyncðo

+ðind n. _swelling_, #Lcd#.

ðindan^3 _to swell, swell up_, Æ: (wrongly, through confusion betw.
'tabescere' and 'tumescere') _melt, pass away_, #PPs# 111^9; 118^158:
_be angry_.

ðînen f. _maid-servant, handmaid_, Æ: _midwife_, Æ. [ðegn]

ðing n. _'thing,' creature_, _Æ, Lcd_: _object, property_, _Æ, Bo, Bl,
Lcd_: _cause, motive, reason_, _Æ_: _lawsuit_, _PPs_: _event, affair,
act, deed, enterprise_, _Æ, CP, Lcd, MtR_: _condition, circumstances_,
_Æ_: _contest, discussion, council, assembly_, _An, B, Cr, LL_: _court
of justice_, v. LL 2·449: _point, respect_, #Bl#. mid nânum ðingum adv.
_not at all_. for his ðingum _for his sake_. for ðisum ðingum _for this
reason_. be fullum ðingum _abundantly_. ¯ænige ðinga _anyhow, in any way,
somehow_. raðost ðinga _at the earliest_. ælces ðinges _entirely, in
every respect_.

ðingan _to invite, address_? #Gl#.

+ðingan = +ðêon

+ðinge n. _meeting, council_: _agreement, covenant_: _fate_.

ðingemann m. (_Danish_) _mercenary_.  [[from first edition]]

±ðingere m. _advocate, intercessor, mediator, priest_, #Gl#, CP.

ðingestre f. _female advocate, mediatrix_, HL 10^698.

ðinggemearc n. ¶ _reckoning of time, allotted time_.

ðingian (w. d.) _to beg, pray, ask, intercede for_, _LL, Sat_; CP: _come
to terms, covenant, conciliate, compound with, settle_: (refl.)
_reconcile oneself (with)_: _determine, purpose, design_: _talk,
harangue_. ['_thing_']

ðinglêas _free (from sin or crime)_, LL 412.

ðingmann = ðingemann

ðingr¯æden f. _intercession, pleading, mediation, intervention_, Æ.

+ðingsceat m. _ransom_, CP 339^10.

ðingstede ¶ m. _meeting-place, place of assembly_.

ðingstôw f. _meeting-place, place of council_: _place where ways meet,
village_: _market_.

+ðingðo = +ðyncðo

ðingum adv. (instr. pl. of ðing) _purposely_.

±ðingung f. _advocacy, intercession, mediation_, Æ, CP.

ðinn- = ðynn-

ðînne asm. of ðîn II.

ðînnen = ðînen

ðinra = ðynra comp. of ðynne.

ðînra gp. of ðîn II.

ðint pres. 3 sg. of ðindan.

ðîo = ðêo

ðio- = ðeo-

ðîr f. _a female servant_, JnLR 18^17. [_ON._ ðîr]

ðird- (_NG_) = ðrid-

ðîre = ðînre gdsf. of ðîn II.

ðirel == ðyrel

ðirl- = ðyrl-

ðirnet = ðyrniht

ðirsceflôr, ðirscelflôr == ðerscelflôr

ðirsceð pres. 3 sg. of ðerscan.

ðirscwald = ðerscold

ðirst = ðurst

ðis v. ðês.

ðisa = ðissa gp. of ðês.

ðisan = ðisum dsmn. of ðês.

ðises gsmn. of ðês.

ðîsl f., ðîsle f. _waggon-pole, pole, shaft_. [_Ger._ deichsel]

ðislic = ðyllic

ðism = dism

ðisne as. of ðês.

ðison = ðisum dsmn. of ðês.

ðissa gp., ðisse, ðissere gdsf.; ðisson, ðissum dsmn. and dp. of ðês.

ðistel m. '_thistle_,' _Gl, WW_ (y); Mdf.

ðistelgebl¯æd n. _blister caused by thistle_, #Lcd# 162b.

ðisteltwige f. _a kind of bird, goldfinch_? _linnet_? #Gl#.

ðîsternes (CP) = ðêostornes

ðîstr- = ðêostr-

ðîstra m. _trace, article of harness_? WW.

ðisum dsmn. and dp. of ðês.

ðiðer = ðider

ðîustr- (Cp) = ðêostr-

ðîwan = ðýwan

ðîwen, ðîwon = ðêowen

ðîwwracu = ðêowwracu

ðîxl (#Gl#) = ðîsl

ðô f. _clay, loam_, #Gl#. [_Ger._ ton]

ðocerian, ðocrian _to run up and down_, WW.

ðoddettan _to strike, push_, W.

ðoden (ô?) n. _whirlwind, high wind, whirlpool_, _Æ, Cp, CP, Chr_.
['_thode_']

ðôdor = ðôðor

ðoft, ðofte f. _bench for rowers_, _WW_. ['_thoft_']

+ðofta m. _comrade, mate_, Æ, AO.

+ðoftian _to join, unite, associate_ (wið), AO.

±ðoftr¯æden f. _fellowship_, Æ.

±ðoftscipe m. _companionship_.

+ðogen _virtuous, excellent_. [pp. of ðêon]

ðôh (#Gl#) = tôh

ðôhe f. _clay_, #Gl# (= ðô).

±ðôht (+ exc. N) mn. _process of thinking, 'thought,'_ _LL_: _mind_,
_Gl_: _a thought, idea_, _MtR_: _compassion, 'viscera,'_ LkLR 1^78.
[ðencan]

+ðohta = +ðofta

ðôhte pret. 3 sg. of ðencan.

ðôiht _clayey_, WW 348^11.

ðol m. _'thole,' oar-pin_, _Cp, WW_.

ðolebyrde _patient_, _Sc_. ['_tholeburde_']

ðolebyrdnes f. _endurance_, _Sc_ 3^8 (i^2). ['_tholeburdness_']

ðolemôd = ðolmôd

±ðolian _to suffer, endure, undergo_, _An, B, Gen, MkL_; AO, CP:
_allow_, _KC_: _persevere, hold out_ (intr.), _survive_: (w. g.) _to
lose, lack, forfeit, be without, dispense with_, Æ. ['_thole_']

ðoll = ðol

ðolle f. _saucepan_, OEG 4115.

ðolmôd I. _forbearing, patient_, _Æ, Sc, OEG_. II. m. _patience_? ÆL
1·16^334#d#. ['_tholemode_']

ðolmôdnes f. _forbearance, patience_, _Æ_. ['_tholemodeness_']

ðolo- = ðol(e)-

ðon I. instr. sing. of sê. II. adv. _then, now_: _thence_: (in negative
clauses, with comparatives) _in comparison with_: _inasmuch as, when_.
æfter ðon _after that_. ¯ær ðon _before that_ (antequam). nô ðon lange...
_not long until..._. tô ðon _to that extent_. III. (#VPs#) = ðonne

ðôn = ð¯æm

ðonan = ðanon

ðonc = ðanc

ðone asm. of sê _the, that_.

ðonêcan = ðanêcan

ðonen = ðanon

ðong == ðanc

ðonne (a, æ) adv. and conj. _then_, _AO_; CP: _therefore, wherefore_:
_yet_: _while, when_: _thereafter, henceforth_: _rather than_, _Ps_:
_since_: _although_: (with comparatives) '_than_,' Æ, CP. ðonne...ðonne
_when...then_. ð. hwæðere _yet, nevertheless_. ð. gýt _as yet, even_.
ð. ðe _since_.

ðonon = ðanon

Ðor m. _Thor_, #Lcd#, W.

ðorf (NG) = ðeorf

ðorfæst _useful_, NG. [ðearf]

ðorfend == ðearfend

ðorfte pret. 3 sg. of ðurfan.

ðorh (#VPs#) == ðurh

ðorhniht = ðorniht

ðorlêas _useless_, NG. [ðearf]

ðorn m. _'thorn,' thorn-bush_, _Æ, Bo, G, Gl_; CP; Mdf: _name of the
rune for =ð=_, _Run_.

ðorncynn n. _a kind of thorn_.

ðorngebl¯æd n. _blister caused by a thorn_, #Lcd# 162b.

ðornian _to lose_, v. MF 174.

ðornig '_thorny_,' _Æ, WW_.

ðorn-iht, -eht(e) _thorny_.

ðorning m. _thorny place_, BC 1·480^8 (Mdf).

ðornrind f. _thorn-bark_, #Lcd# 19a.

ðorof (_MtL_) = ðeorf

ðorp (ðrop) m. _farm_: _village_, _Cp, Ep, WW_ (ro). ['_thorp_']

ðorscen pp. of ðerscan.

ðost m. _dung_, #Lcd#.

+ðôt = +ðêot

ðoterian _to cry, howl, lament_, Æ(o^2).

ðoterung f. _groaning, wailing_, Æ.

ðotor-, ðotr- = ðoter-

ðôð (#Chr# 1135) = ðêah I.

ðôðor, ðôðer m. _ball_.

ðox = dox

ðrâ = ðrêa

+ðracen _prepared, decked_, Æ.

ðracian _to fear, dread, shun_, RHy 9^50.

ðracu ¶ f., gs. ðræce _pressure, fury, storm, violence_: _onrush,
attack_.

±ðræc (usu. +) n. _throng, force, violence_: _equipment_, OEG.

ðræcheard _brave in battle_, #El# 123.

ðræchwîl f. _time of misery_, #Jul# 554.

ðræcian = ðracian

ðræcrôf _keen in fight_, #Gen# 2030.

ðræcswald = ðerscold

ðræcwîg m. _violent combat_, #Ex# 182.

ðræcwudu m. _spear_, B 1246 (e^1).

ðr¯æd (ê) m. '_thread_,' _Bo, Lcd_; Æ.

+ðræf n. _rebuke, censure_, NC 297?

+ðr¯æf (on) _unanimously_.

ðræft n. _contentiousness_, #Mod# 42.

ðr¯ægan ¶ _to run_.

ðr¯æging = ðrêagung

ðr¯æl (êa) m. _serf, 'thrall,'_ _LL, NG_.

ðr¯ælriht n. _serf's right_, W 158^15.

ðr¯æs (ê) _fringe, hem_, #Gl#.

ðr¯æscan = ðr¯æstan

ðræsce (_Cp_) = ðrysce

ðræst = dærst

±ðr¯æstan _to writhe, twist, press, force_, _BH_: _crush, oppress,
torment_. [v. '_threst_,' '_i-thrast_']

+ðr¯æstednes f. _contrition_, GD, WW.

ðr¯æstnes f. _trouble, pain, grief_: (+) _contrition_.

ðr¯æstung f. _affliction, torment_, CP 317^7.

ðr¯æwen = ðrâwen pp. of ðrâwan.

ðr¯æwung = ðrêagung

ðræxwold = ðerscold

ðrafian _to restrain, reprove_, CP: _urge, push, press_, Æ.

ðrafung f. _reproof, correction_, CP.

ðrâg f. _space of time, time, while, period, season_, _Gen, Jul_:
_occasion_, _B, Bl, Bo_: _evil times_: _paroxysm_. ðrâge _for a time,
some time, long time_. ðrâgum _at times, sometimes_. ealle ðrâge _all
the time, continually_. ['_throw_']

ðrâgbysig _long busy_? #Rd# 5^1.

ðrâglic (ðrah-) _long-continued_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

ðrâgm¯ælum _at times, sometimes_.

ðrâh == ðrâg

ðrâll = ðrêal, ðr¯æl

ðrang pret. 3 sg. of ðringan.

±ðrang n. _throng, crowd, tumult_.

±ðrâwan^7 _to turn, twist, curl_, _Æ, WW_; CP: _rack_. ['_throw_']

ðrâwingspinl f. _crisping-pin_, OEG.

ðrâwu (#Gl#) = ðrêa

ðrê = ðrêo

ðrêa I. mfn. _threat, menace, abuse_, CP: _rebuke, castigation_:
_oppression, attack_: _calamity, throe_. [ðrêowan] II. imperat. of
ðrêagan.

ðreacs = ðreax

ðrêade pret. 1, 3 sg. of ðrêagan.

±ðrêagan, ðrêawian (ê) _to rebuke, chastise, correct, punish_, _CP, Mt_;
Æ: _threaten, menace_: _attack, oppress, torture, afflict, vex, harass_.
['_threa_']

ðrêagend m. _reprover_, OEG 5380.

ðrêagung (¯æ, êaw-) f. _threatening, reproof, correction_.

ðreahs = ðreax

ðrêal I. f. _discipline, correction, punishment_, Æ: _reproof_:
_threat_. II. = ðr¯æl

ðrêalic ¶ _severe, terrible, calamitous_.

ðrêan (Æ) = ðrêagan

ðrêanêd == ðrêanîed

ðrêang = ðrêagung

ðrêanîed ¶ f. _affliction, misery, distress, calamity_.

ðrêanîedla (ê^2, y^2) ¶ m. _affliction, misfortune_.

ðrêanîedlic _calamitous_, #Jul# 128.

ðrêanýd == ðrêanîed

ðrêapian _to reprove, correct_, CP 165^17. ['_threap_']

ðrêapung f. _reproof_, CP 167^14.

ðrêat I. (êo) m. _press, crowd, throng, host, troop_, _B, El, Mk_:
_oppression, coercion, calamity_, _Bl, Jul_: _threatening_? _Æ_.
['_threat_'] II. pret. 3 sg. of ðrêotan.

ðrêatend m. _violent person_, MtL.

ðrêatian _to urge, press, force, attack, harass_, _Æ, Cp, MH, Mt_:
_threaten_, _PPs_: _reprove, rebuke_, Æ, CP. ['_threat_']

ðrêatm¯ælum (ê) adv. _in swarms_.

ðrêatnes f. _affliction, tribulation_, NC 327.

ðrêatnian (Æ) = ðrêatian. ['_threaten_']

ðrêatung f. _threatening, compulsion, ill-usage_, AO: _correction,
reproof_, CP.

ðrêaung = ðrêagung

ðrêaw pret. 3 sg. of ðrêowan.

ðrêawend = ðrôwend

ðrêaweorc n. _misery_, #Gen# 737. [_OS._]

ðrêawian = ðrêagian  [[headword spelled "ðrêagan"]]

ðrêawung = ðrêagung

ðreax (e) _rottenness, rubbish, refuse_, #Bas# 48^20; ÆL 35^150. [_ON._
ðrekkr; v. ES 43·332]

ðrec == ðræc

ðrece m. _oppression, force_: _weariness_. [ðracu]

ðrecswald = ðerscold

ðrêd (_Cp_) = ðr¯æd

+ðrêgan = +ðrêan

ðrêgian = ðr¯ægan

ðrehtig = ðrohtig

ðremm == ðrymm

ðrêo v. ðrîe.

ðreo- = ðri-

±ðreodian (y) _to think over, deliberate_: _meditate_.

ðreodung f. _deliberation, consideration_: _scruple, hesitation_.

ðreohtig = ðrohtig

ðrêohund n. _three hundred_, Æ.

ðrêohundwintre _of the age of three hundred years_, Æ.

ðreom v. ðrîe.

ðreoniht f. _period of three days_, #Pa# 38.

ðrêora v. ðrîe.

ðreosellic = ðrisellic

ðrêostru = ðêostru

ðrêot = ðrêat

ðrêotan^2 _to vex, weary_, AS 46^2.

ðrêotêoða '_thirteenth_,' _Æ, MH_ (-tegða), _Mt_ (y^1); AO.

ðrêotîne '_thirteen_,' _BH_ (e^2), #Men# (y^2).

ðrêotînegeare _thirteen years old_, MH 216^16.

ðrêott- = ðrêot-

ðrêow I. pret. 3 sg. of ðrâwan. II. = ðrîe

ðrêowan^2 _to suffer, strive for_. [ðrea]  [[from first edition]]

ðrêowian = ðrôwian

ðreoxwold = ðerscold

ðrep? '_fornix_,' Ln 34^59 (drep).

ðrepel = ðrypel  [[headword spelled "ðrýpel"]]

ðrerêðre = ðrirêðre

ðrês = ðr¯æs

ðrescan = ðerscan

ðrescold, ðrescwald = ðerscold

ðrêst- = ðr¯æst-

ðrêt = (1) ðrêat; (2) ðr¯æd

ðrêung = ðrêaung

ðrex = ðreax

ðrex- = ðersc-

ðrî = ðrîe

ðria = ðriwa

ðribeddod (y) _three-bedded, having three couches_, WW 184^24.

ðriccan = ðryccan

ðridæglic (eo, y) adj. _lasting three days_, BH 350^32.

ðrid¯æled (eo, y) _tripartite_, OEG.

ðridda (y) num. adj. '_third_,' _Bl, Cr, Lcd_; AO, CP. ðridde healf _two
and a half_.

ðridung = ðreodung

ðrîe (î, ý) num. nam.; nafn. ðrêo; gmfn. ðrêora; dmfn. ðrim (ðreom)
'_three_.'

ðrie- = ðri-

ðrîeste = ðrîste adv.  [[under "ðrîst"]]

ðrîetan _to weary_: _force_.

ðrifeald _threefold_.

ðrifealdan _to multiply by three, increase threefold_.
  [[from first edition]]

ðrifealdlic _threefold, triple_. adv. -lîce _in three ways_.

ðrifeoðor = ðrifeðor

ðrifête '_three-footed_,' _ÆGr_.

ðrifeðor _triangular_, #Gl#.

ðrifingre (v) _three fingers broad or thick_, LL 110[49,3].

ðriflêre (y) _three-storied_, ÆH 2·70^17.

ðri-fotede, -fotad '_three-footed_,' _WW_ (y).

ðrifyldan = ðrifealdan

ðrifyrede _three-furrowed_, #ÆGr# 288^12n.

ðrig = ðrîe

ðriga = ðriwa

ðrig¯ærede _three-pronged_, #ÆGr# 288^10 (eo).

ðrigêare _three years old_: _space of three years_.

ðrigylde I. adj. _subject to threefold payment, or compensation_, LL.
II. adv. LL.

ðrihêafdede '_three-headed_,' _ÆGr_ 67^11 (y).

ðrihing == ðriðing

ðrihîwede _having three forms_, #ÆGr# 287^10 (y).

ðrihlidede _having three openings_, #ÆGr# 288^6 (y).

ðri-hyrne, -hyrnede (eo) _three-cornered_.

ðrilêfe _three-leaved_. as sb. = _trefoil_? _wood-sorrel_? WW
133^22 (y).

ðrilen (WW 151^34, y), ðrilig, ðrili adj. _woven with three threads_,
_Cp, Ln, WW_; LV. ['_thrile_']

ðrilic _triple, threefold_, VHy (y).

ðrilîðe n. _year with an extra month_ (_a third, named_ lîða).

ðrim I. = ðrymm. II. v. ðrîe.

ðrim- = ðrym-

ðrimen (y) _a third part_, #Lcd# 47a.

ðri-meolce, -milce n. _May_.

ðrims, ðrimse = trymes

ðrindan = ðrintan

ðrinen (y) _three-fold_.

Ðrines f. _Trinity_, _Æ, BH_. ['_threeness_,' '_thrinness_']

+ðring n. _crowd, pressure, commotion_, _An_; ÆL (y). [v. '_thring_']

±ðringan^3 _to press, squeeze, crowd upon, throng_, _An, Mk, Ph_: _press
forward, rush on, hasten, advance_, _AO_: _oppress_: (+) _pinch (with
cold)_. ['_thring_']

ðrinihte _three days old_, #Lcd#.

ðrinna _three-fold, three times_, _LL_. ['_thrin_']

Ðrinnes (Æ) = Ðrines

ðrintan^3 _to swell_, #Mod# 24.

ðrîo = ðrêo. v. ðrîe.

ðrîostr- (#KGl#) = ðêostr-

ðrirêðre _with three rows of oars_. as sb. _trireme_, AO (îe).

ðrisce = ðrysce

ðriscelflôr = ðerscelflôr

ðriscýte (ý^1) _triangular_, AO. [scêat]

ðrisellic _tripartite_, #Nar# 35^29 (eo^1).

ðrislite _tripod, three-forked_, A 4·151 (ie?).

ðrisnæcce (y^1, e^2) _three-forked_, #ÆGr# 288^12.

ðrîsnes = ðrîstnes

ðrîst, ðrîste I. adj. _daring, rash, bold_: _audacious, shameless_, _CP,
W_. II. adv. _boldly, daringly_. ['_thriste_'; _Ger._ dreist]

ðrîstelic = ðrîstiglic

ðrîstful _presumptuous_, A 13·369.

ðrîsthycgende ¶ _brave-minded_.

ðrîsthýdig ¶ _bold, valorous_.

+ðrîstian _to dare, presume_.

ðrîstiglic _rash, bold, daring_. adv. -lîce.

±ðrîstl¯æcan _to presume, dare_, CP.

ðrîstl¯æcnes f. _boldness_, GD.

+ðrîstl¯æcung f. _presumption_, MF 164.

ðrîstlêasnes f. _want of boldness_? A 11·101.

ðristlic == ðrîstiglic

ðrîstling m. _bold person_? (BT), _thrush_ (Mdf), EC 450^15.

ðrîstlong m. _very long_? (or = ðristling?) BC 3·618.

ðrîstnes f. _rashness, boldness_.

ðrîstra = ðîstra

ðristrenge (eo, y) _three-stringed_, #ÆGr# 288^10.

ðrît (Æ) pres. 3 sg. of ðrîetan.

ðrîtig '_thirty_,' _B, Bl_; AO, CP.

ðrîtigfeald '_thirtyfold_,' _Mt_.

ðrîtigoða '_thirtieth_,' _ÆGr_ (tt), _BH_.

ðrîtigwintre _thirty years old_, Æ.

ðrittêoða = ðrêotêoða

ðrittig == ðrîtig

ðrîð == ðrýð

ðriðing _third part of a county, riding_, LL (late).

ðriðinggerêfa m. _governor or sheriff of a_ 'ðriðing,' LL (late).

ðriwa adv. _thrice_, _Mk, RB_; AO. ['_thrie_']

ðriwin-tre, -tra, -ter _three years old_, _WW_. [v. '_thrinter_']

ðroc n. _table_, Mk 11^15: _piece of wood on which the ploughshare is
fixed_.

ðroehtig = ðrohtig

ðrôh I. '_rancor_,' #Gl#. II. '_rancidus_,' OEG.

ðroht ¶ I. m. _exertion, labour, endurance, toil, trouble, suffering_.
II. adj. _dire, troublesome, tormenting_.

ðrohtheard ¶ _strong in enduring_: _hard to endure_.

ðrohtig (e? eo) _enduring, persistent, persevering, laborious_.

ðrong = ðrang pret. 3 sg. of ðringan.

ðrop = ðorp

ðrosle = ðrostle

ðrosm m. _smoke, vapour_, Æ.

ðrosmig _vaporous, smoky_, W 138^26.

ðrostle (ô?) f. _'throstle,' thrush_, _BC, Cp, GD_.

ðrota (WW 306^13) = ðrote

ðrotbolla m. _gullet, windpipe, larynx_, _Æ, Gl, LL_. ['_throatboll_']

ðrote, ðrotu f. '_throat_,' _Æ, Bo, WW_.

ðroten pp. of ðrêotan.

ðrotu (Æ) = ðrote

ðrôung = ðrôwung

ðrowen pp. of ðrêowan.

ðrôwend m. _serpent, scorpion, basilisk_, Æ.

ðrôwend- = ðrôwiend-

ðrôwere m. _sufferer, martyr_.

ðrôwerhâd, ðrôwethâd m. _martyrdom_, GD.

±ðrôwian (o?) _to endure, suffer, die_, _Æ, B Bl, Bo_; AO, CP: _pay for,
atone for_. ['_throw_']

ðrowiendhâd (e^2) m. _martyrdom_, GD 231^8#c#.

ðrôw-iendlic, -igendlic _suffering, enduring, passive_, Æ. ð. dêað
_apoplexy_.

ðrôwung f. _suffering_, _Æ, CP_: _passion, martyrdom_: _painful
symptom_: _anniversary of martyrdom_. ['_throwing_']

ðrôwungr¯æding f. _reading about martyrs, martyrology_, CM 286.

ðrôwung-tîd f., -tîma n. _time of suffering_.

+ðrûen pp. of ðweran.

ðrûh fmn. _pipe, trough_, _Gl, MH_: _chest_: _tomb, coffin_, _Æ, BH_.
['_through_']

ðrum = ðrim v. ðrîe.

-ðrum v. tunge-ð. ['_thrum_']

ðrungen pp., ðrungon pret. pl. of ðringan.

-ðrût v. fisc-ð.

ðrûtigende _strutting, bouncing_, Æ: _threatening_, ÆL 10^273.

ðruton pret. pl. of ðrêotan.

ðrûtung _anger, pride_: _threatening_, ÆL 7^76.

ðruðhorn = truðhorn  [[headword spelled "trûðhorn"]]

ðrý = ðrîe, ðrî

±ðryccan pret., ðrycte, ðryhte (tr.) _to trample on, crush, oppress,
afflict_, _Bo_; CP: (intr.) _press, push_, _Gu_. ['_thrutch_']

+ðryccednes f. _distress, trouble_, MF (Vesp. D xiv).

ðrycnes f. _tribulation, affliction_, MtR.

ðrydda = ðridda

+ðrýde pret. 3 sg. of +ðrýn.

+ðrýdfullod '_elatus_,' #RPs# 130^1.

ðrydian = ðreodian

ðrýdig = ðrýðig

ðrýdlîce = ðrýðlîce

ðrydung = ðreodung

ðrýh = ðrûh

ðryhte pret. 3 sg. of ðryccan.

ðryl = ðyrl, ðyrel

+ðrýl n. _crowd, multitude_, ÆL 23^92. [ðrýn]

ðrym = (1) ðrymm; (2) ðrim

ðrymcyme m. _glorious coming_, #Gu# 1230.

ðrymcyning ¶ m. _glorious king, king of glory, God_.

ðrymdôm m. _glory_, W 254^14#d#.

ðrymen = ðrimen

ðrymfæst ¶ _glorious, illustrious, noble, mighty_.

ðrymful ¶ _glorious, majestic, peerless_.

ðrymilce = ðrimeolce

ðrymlic _glorious, magnificent_, AO: _powerful, mighty_. adv. -lîce.

ðrymm m. _multitude, host, troop_, _ÆL, Cr_: _torrent_: _force, power,
might, ability_: _glory, majesty, splendour_, _CP_. ['_thrum_']

ðrymma m. _brave man, hero_, #An# 1141.

ðrymme, ðrymmum adv. _powerfully, violently_.

ðrymrîce n. _realm of glory, heaven_, #Bl# 105^11.

ðrymsa = trymes

ðrym-seld n., -setl (Æ) n. _seat of honour, throne_.

ðrymsittende ¶ ptc. _sitting in glory, dwelling in heaven_.

ðrymwealdend I. adj. _all-ruling_. II. m. _lord of glory_.

+ðrýn _to press, bind_, v. NC 328.

ðrync (AO 76^34) = drinc, imperat. of drincan.

ðrynen = ðrinen

Ðrynes = Ðrines

ðryng sb. _conduit, channel_? (= ðring?) WW 198^14.

Ðrynnes (Æ) = Ðrines

ðryosm = ðrosm

ðrýpel (ê) m. _instrument of torture, cross_? WW 225^41. [ðrêapian]

ðrýpelûf '_eculeus_,' '_catasta_,' WW 180^13.

+ðryscan _to weigh down, afflict, oppress_, CP. [ðerscan]

ðrysce (æ, i, y) '_thrush_,' _WW_.

ðryscel- = ðerscel-

±ðrysman, +ðrysmian _to press, oppress, stifle_, AO. [ðrosm]

ðryssce = ðrysce

ðrýst == ðrîst

ðrýst- = ðêost-

ðrýt pres. 3 sg. of ðrêotan.

ðrýð ¶ f. (often in pl.) _might, power, force, strength_: _majesty,
glory, splendour_: _multitude, troop, host_.

ðrýðærn n. _noble house, palace_, B 657.

ðrýðbearn n. _strong youth_, #An# 494.

ðrýðbord n. _strong shield_, #El# 151.

ðrýðcyning m. _king of glory, God_, #An# 436.

ðrýðful ¶ _strong, brave_.

ðrýðgesteald § n. _splendid dwelling, palace_.

ðrýðig _mighty, strong_, #Gen# 1986?

ðrýðlic _strong, valiant_. adv. -lîce(?).

ðrýðo = ðrýð

ðrýðswýð ¶ n. _mighty, powerful_, B.

ðrýðu = ðrýð

ðrýðum _very, violently_.

ðrýðweorc n. _mighty work_, #An# 774.

ðrýðword n. _lofty discourse_, B 643.

ðu (û) pron. 2 pers., gs. ðîn, das. ðe, ðec; dual n. git, gît, g. incer,
d. inc, a. incit, inc; np. gê, gîe, gp. êower, dp. êow, ap. êowic, êow
'_thou_.'

ðûf m. _tuft_: _banner, standard, crest_. [_L._ tufa]

+ðûf _thriving, luxuriant_, WW.

ðûfb¯ære _leafy_, OEG 2222.

ðûfeðistel = ðûðistel

ðûfian _to shoot forth, grow luxuriantly_, WW 408^2.

ðûfig _leafy_, WW 408^3.

ðûft m. _thicket_, WW 408^14.

ðugon pret. pl. of ðêon.

+ðûhsian _to make misty, dark_, W 137^9.

ðûhte pret. 3 sg. of ðyncan.

+ðuhtsum _abundant_, MH 138^15.

ðullic = ðyllic

ðûma m. '_thumb_,' _Ep, Lcd, LL_.

ðumle sbpl. _entrails_, Cp 210#u#.

+ðun n. _loud noise_, #PPs# 45^3.

ðunar = ðunor

ðunden pp. of ðindan.

ðunelic = ðunorlic

ðuner = ðunor

ðuner- = ðun(o)r-

ðung m. _a poisonous plant, wolf's-bane, aconite, nightshade_? #Gl#.

+ðungen _full grown, thriven_: _competent, excellent, distinguished,
virtuous_, ÆL. [pp. of ðêon]

+ðungenlîce adv. _virtuously, soberly_.

±ðungennes f. _growth_: _goodness, excellence, virtue, perfection_.

ðunian _to stand out, be prominent_: _be proud_: _roar, thunder, crash,
groan_.

ðunnung = ðûnung  [[error for "ðunung"?]]

ðunnur = ðunor

ðunor (e^2, u^2) m., gs. ðun(o)res '_thunder_,' _AO, Cp, Jn, Rd_:
_thunderclap_, _Lcd_: _the god Thunder, Thor_: '_Jupiter_,' _WW_; WW.

ðunor- = ðunr-

ðunorbodu f. _sea-bream_? WW 180^34.

ðunorcl¯æfre f. _bugle (plant)_, #Lcd#.

ðunorlic (e^2) _thundery_, OEG.

ðunorrâd f. _thunder, thundering_, Æ.

ðunorrâdlic _thundering_, #HGl# 451^46.

ðunorrâdstefn f. _voice of thunder_, #PPs# 76^14.

ðunorwyrt f. _thunder-wort, houseleek_, #Lcd#.

ðunresdæg m. '_Thursday_,' Æ; _LL_.

ðunresniht f. _the eve of Thursday, Wednesday night_.

±ðunrian _to 'thunder,'_ _Bo, Jn_ (impers.); _PPs_ (pers.).

ðunring f. _thundering_, #Chr# 1085.

ðunung f. _creaking, noise, din_, WW.

ðunur = ðunor

ðunur- = ðun(o)r-

ðun-wang (e, o), -wange (æ, e) f. (n?) _temple (of the head)_, _Æ, WW_.
['_thunwang_']

Ður = Ðor

ðuren = ðworen pp. of ðweran.

ðuresdæg = ðunresdæg

ðurfan swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. ðearf, pl. ðurfon; pret. sg. ðorfte; subj.
pres. ðurfe, ðyrfe _to need, be required_: _must, have occasion to_,
_Gen, LL_; CP: _want, be needy_: _be under an obligation, owe_.
['_tharf_'; ðearf]

ðurg = ðurh prep.

ðurh (e, o) I. prep. (w. d. a. g.) (space) _'through' ('thorough')_,
_G_: (time) _through, during_, _PPs_: (causal: agent, means, instrument)
_through, by means of, in consequence of, because of_, _BH, Bl, G, Gen_.
ðurh ealle _entirely_: (manner) _in, with, by, in conformity with_: _for
the sake of, in the name of_, _Sat_: (end, aim) _with a view to, on
behalf of_. II. adv. _through, throughout_, _PPs_.

ðûrh = ðrûh

ðurhbeorht _very bright, transparent, radiant, clear_, Æ.

ðurhbiter _thoroughly bitter, sour, perverse_, #CERPs# 77^8.

ðurhblâwan^7 _to inspire, animate_, CM 370.

ðurhborian _to bore through_.

ðurhbrecan^4 _to break through_, Æ.

ðurhbregdan^3 _to draw through, transport_.

ðurhbrengan _to bring through_, #LPs# 77^13.

ðurhbrûcan^2 _to enjoy fully_, WW 98^1.

ðurhburnen _thoroughly burnt_, #Lcd# 165b.

ðurhcl¯ænsian _to cleanse thoroughly_, MtR 3^12.

ðurhcrêopan^2 _to creep through, pass through_, #Bo# 93^5.

ðurhdelfan^3 _to dig through, pierce_, Æ.

ðurhdôn 1. _to go through, work through, finish, accomplish_.
2. _to make to pass through_.  [[from first edition]]

ðurhdrencan _to saturate_, #Kl# 17^148.

ðurhdrêogan^2 _to work through, accomplish, pass (time)_, CM.

ðurhdrîfan^1 _to drive or push through, strike_: _pierce, perforate_:
_penetrate, imbue_.

ðurhdûfan^2 _to dive through_, B 1619.

ðurhendian (e^1) _to accomplish, perfect_, LL 411[2,2].

ðurhetan^5 _to eat through, consume_.

ðurhf¯ære = ðurhfêre

ðurhfæstnian _to transfix_, JnLR 19^37.

ðurhfaran^6 _to pass through, traverse, penetrate, pierce_, CP.

ðurhfarennes f. inner chamber, #ASPs# 104^28.

ðurhfêran _to pass through, traverse, penetrate_, _BH_.
['_thoroughfare_']

ðurhfêre I. _penetrable_. II. n. _secret chamber_.

ðurhflêon^2 _to fly through_, BH 136^1.

ðurhfôn^7 _to penetrate_, B 1504.

ðurh-gân anv., pret. -êode _to go through, pass through, penetrate_,
_Æ_. ['_throughgo_']

ðurhgangan^7 = ðurhgân

ðurhgedôn = ðurhdôn

ðurhgefeht n. _war_, Cp 205#p# (o^1).

ðurhgêotan^2 _to fill entirely, imbue, saturate, impregnate_.

ðurhglêdan _to heat through_, #Da# 244.

ðurhh¯ælan _to heal thoroughly_, #Lcd#.

ðurhhâlig _most holy_.

ðurhhefig _very heavy_, GD 104^26.

ðurhholod _bored through_, OEG 4035.

ðurhhwît _quite white_, WW 163^6.

ðurhiernan^3 _to run through, traverse, pierce_, Æ.

ðurhl¯ædan _to lead forth, conduct_.

ðurel¯æran _to persuade_, #Sc# 38^12.

ðurhl¯æred _very learned, skilled_, WW 118^23.

ðurhlâð _very hateful_, WW 130^28.

ðurhlêor-an, -ian _to penetrate_, GD, #JVPs#.

ðurhlôcung f. _preface, introduction_, WW 172^38.

ðurhr¯æsan _to rush through_, #Rd# 4^36.

ðurhscêotan^2 _to shoot through, pierce_, Æ, AO.

ðurhscînan _to shine through, be transparent_, _WW_ 148^7 (y).
['_throughshine_']

ðurhscînendlic _illustrious, splendid_, #LPs# 15^6.

ðurhscrîðan^1 _to go through, traverse_: _examine, consider_.

ðurhscyldig _very guilty_, Æ.

ðurhscýne = ðurhscîne  [[form of "ðurhscînan"?]]

ðurhsêcan _to search through, inquire thoroughly into_, _Sc_ 209^3.
['_throughseek_']

ðurhsêon^5 _to look through, examine_: _penetrate_, _Bo_.
['_thoroughsee_']

ðurhslêan^6 _to strike or pierce through_, Æ: _attack, afflict, kill_.

ðurhsmêagan _to search thoroughly, investigate, think out_.

ðurhsmûgan^2 _to pierce, bore through, eat through_: _go through
carefully_.

ðurhsmyrian _to smear, anoint_, W 229^3.

ðurhspêdig _very rich_, ÆH 1·502^8.

ðurhsticcian _to transfix_, JnL 19^37 (o^1).

ðurhstingan^3 _to pierce through, thrust through, prick_, Æ, CP.

ðurhstrang _very strong_, OEG 50^25.

ðurhswimman^3 _to swim through_, WW 52^1.

ðurhswîðan _to prevail_, #LPs# 51^9.

ðurhswôgan _to penetrate_, BH 430^5 (v.l.).

ðurhsýne _limpid, transparent_, OEG 23^35.

ðurhtêon^2 _to carry or put through_: _finish, fulfil, carry out,
effect_, Æ, AO, CP: _draw, drag_: _continue_: _afford_: _undergo_.

ðurhtogennes f. _a religious reading at monastic mealtimes_, RBL 118^7.

ðurhtrymman _to confirm_, JnLR 10^25 (e^1).

ðurhðrâwan _to twist through_.

ðurh-ðyddan, -ðýn _to pierce, thrust through_, Æ.

ðurhðyrel (i^2) _pierced through, perforated_, LL.

ðurh-ðyrelian (CP), -ðyrlian _to pierce, penetrate_.

ðurhût prep. (w. a.) adv. _right through_, Æ.

ðurhwac-ol, -el, -ul _wide-awake, sleepless_, Æ.

ðurhwadan^6 _to penetrate, go through, bore, pierce_.

ðurhwæcendlic _very vigilant_, ÆL 23b^43.

ðurhwerod _quite sweet, very sweet_, #Gl#.

ðurhw¯æt _thoroughly wet_, ÆP 172^18.

ðurhwlîtan^1 ¶ _to look through, see_.

ðurhwrecan^5 _to thrust through_.

ðurhwundian _to pierce through, wound badly_, LL 82[61,1].

ðurhwunenes f. _perseverance_, MF 176.

ðurhwunian _to abide continuously, remain, continue, settle down_, Æ,
AO, CP: _persevere, hold out, be steadfast_, CP.

ðurhwunigendlic _constant, continued_. adv. -lîce.

ðurhwunol _perpetual_, NC 328.

ðurhwunung f. _perseverance, persistency_: _continued residence_.

ðurhyrnan = ðurhiernan

ðurresdæg = ðunresdæg

ðurruc m. _small ship_? _hold of a ship_? _WW_ 181^35. [v. '_thurrock_']

ðurscon pret. pl. of ðerscan.

ðursdæg (_Jn_) = ðunresdæg

ðurst (y) m. '_thirst_,' _Lcd_; Æ, AO, #VPs#.

ðurstig '_thirsty_,' _PPs, Mt_ (y); Æ: _thirsting after, greedy_, _Bo_.

ðuru = duru

ðuruh == ðurh

ðus adv. _'thus,' in this way_, _Bl, Cp, Lk_: _as follows_, _Bo, MH,
MtR_: _to this extent_ (qualifying adjs.), _Æ, B, Gl_.

ðûsend num. (sbn., always followed by gen.) '_thousand_,' _Bl, Chr, WW_;
AO, CP.

ðûsend-ealdor, -ealdorman m. _captain of a thousand men_, v. OEG 4747.

ðûsendfeald '_thousand-fold_,' _Æ, W_.

ðûsendgerîm § n. _computation by thousands_.

ðûsendgetel n. _a thousand_. #ÆGr# 284^4.

ðûsendhîwe _multiform_, WW 101^1.

ðûsendlic adj. _of a thousand_.

ðûsendm¯æle? adj. _a thousand each, a thousand_.

ðûsendm¯ælum ¶ adv. _in thousands_.

ðûsendmann m. _captain of a thousand men_, Æ.

ðûsendrîca m. _chief of a thousand men_, WW 110^11.

ðûsent- = ðûsend-

ðuslic = ðyllic

ðuss = ðus

ðûtan = ðêotan

ðûðistel m. _sow-thistle_, _Gl, WW_. ['_thow-thistle_']

+ðûxsian (#Dom# 105) = +ðûhsian

ðwâ (NG) = ðwêa pres. 1 sg. of ðwêan.

ðwægen pp. of ðwêan.

ðw¯æl = ðwêal

ðw¯æle? (ê) f. _fillet_? _towel_? v. OEG 53^26.

±ðw¯ænan _to soften, moisten_, BH, #Lcd#.

ðwæng = ðwang

ðwær- = ðwer-

±ðw¯ære (usu. +) _united, concordant, harmonious_, Æ: _compliant,
obedient_: _agreeable, pleasant, gentle_: _peaceful_: _prosperous_. adv.
-lîce.

±ðw¯ærian (ê) _to agree, consent to_: _reconcile_: _suit, fit_.

±ðw¯ærl¯æcan^1 _to agree, consent (to)_, ÆL: _suit_.

±ðw¯ærnes f. _concord, peace_: _gentleness_.

ðwagen rare pp. of ðwêan.

ðwâh (A) imperat. of ðwêan.

ðwang mf. _'thong,' band, strap, cord_, _Æ, G, WW_: _phylactery_, _MtL_
(e), _R_ (æ).

ðwâr- = ðw¯ær-

ðwarm = ðwearm

ðwastrian _to whisper_, HL 18^381.

ðwât pret. 3 sg. of ðwîtan.

ðwêa pres. 1 sg. of ðwêan.

ðwêal (¯æ, ê) n. _washing, bath, laver_, CP, JnL 12^3: _soap_, ES 43·334:
_ointment_. [_Goth._ ðwahl]

±ðwêan^6 _to wash, cleanse_, Æ, CP: _anoint_, MtL 6^17.

ðwearm m? _cutting tool_, #Gl#.

ðwêhl = ðwêal

ðwêle = ðw¯æle

ðwênan = ðw¯ænan

ðweng (NG) = ðwang

ðwêor, ðweorg = ðweorh

+ðweor v. buter-geð.

ðwêora m. _perversity_, CP 222^8.

ðwêores adv. (gen. of ðweorh) _athwart, transversely, obliquely_, AO:
_perversely_.

ðweorh I. adj., gmn. ðwêores _cross, transverse, bent, crooked_:
_adverse_: _angry_: _perverse, depraved_, CP. II. n. _crookedness,
wrong_.

ðweorh-fero, -furu, -fyri _cross-furrow_, #Gl#.

ðweorhtême = ðwêortîeme

ðweorian = ðweran

±ðwêorian _to oppose, thwart, be opposed to_.

ðwêorlic _perverse, contrary, adverse_, Æ: _reversed, out of order_.
adv. -lîce. CP.

ðwêornes (ý) f. _perversity, frowardness, obstinacy, depravity_, Æ.

ðwêorscipe m. _perversity_, CP.

ðwêortîeme (ê^2, î^2, ý^2) _contentious, perverse, wicked_, CP.

ðweoton (BH 204^32) = ðwiton pret. pl. of ðwîtan.

ðwêr, ðwerh = ðweorh

ðweran^4 _to stir, churn_: (¶) _beat, forge, render malleable, soften_.

ðwihð (ie) pres. 3 sg. of ðwêan.

ðwînan _to decrease, lessen_, #Lcd#.

+ðwinglod _fastened up_? (BT), HL 18^218.

ðwîr = ðweorh

ðwiril m. _handle of a churn, whisk_, WW 280^31. [ðweran]

+ðwit n. _cuttings_, BH 204^32 (v.l.). [ðwîtan]

ðwîtan^1 _to cut_, _'whittle,' cut off, cut out_, _BH, Lcd_.
['_thwite_']

ðwôg, ðwôh pret. 3 sg., ðwogen pp. of ðwêan.

ðwong = ðwang

ðworen pp. of ðweran.

+ðwôrnes = +ðwêornes

ðwurh = ðweorh

ðwyhð pres. 3 sg. of ðwêan.

ðwýr (Æ), ðwýr- = ðweorh, ðwêor-

ðwyril = ðwiril

ðwýrs = ðwêores

ðý I. pron. (instr. sing. of sê, ðæt). æfter ðý _after (that)_, _later_.
II. conj. and adv. _because, since, on that account_: _therefore_,
_Lcd_: _then_: (with comparatives) _the_. ðý...ðý _the...the_. mid ðý
_while, when_. tô ðý ðæt _for the purpose that, in order that_. for ðý
ðe _because_. ðý l¯æs (ðe) _lest_. ['_thy_']

ðýan = ðýn

ðyc- = ðic-

ðýdæges adv. _on the same day_.

ðýdan = ðêodan

ðyddan _to strike, stab_, CP: _thrust, press_, Æ. ['_thud_']

+ðýde _good, virtuous_. #Cra# 68.

ðyder == ðider

ðýf == ðêof

ðýfel m. _shrub, bush, copse, thicket_, _Lcd, LPs, WW_; Æ. ['_thyvel_';
ðûf]

ðýfeðorn y? (ê, êo, î) m. _buckthorn_? _hawthorn_? _bramble_? _Gl_
(ê, êo), _Lcd_ (ê), _WW_. ['_thevethorn_']

ðýflen? (or ? ryplen) _bushy_, GPH 399^457.

ðyften f. _handmaid_, OEG. ['_thuften_']

ðýfð = ðîefð

ðýgan = _ðýn_

+ðyht _pleasing_, #Rim# 18.

ðyhtig _strong_, B 1558.

ðýhð pres. 3 sg. of ðêon.

ðýl¯æs conj. _lest_. ðý l¯æs ðe _lest_.

ðylc = ðyllic

ðylcræft (e) m. _elocution, rhetoric_, OEG.

±ðyld (usu +) nf. _patience_, _LkLR_. ['_thild_']

±ðyldelic _patient_. adv. -lîce _patiently, quietly_.

+ðyld-ian, -(i)gian _to be patient, bear, endure_, CP: _give in, agree_,
OEG 3237.

±ðyldig (usu. +) adj. _patient_, _DR_; Æ, CP. [v. '_thild_']

+ðyldmôd _patient_, W 72^7.

+ðyldmôdnes f. _patience_, NC 297.

+ðyldum _patiently, steadfastly_.

ðyle m. _speaker, orator_: _jester_, WW 385^3.

ðylian (Æ) = ðilian

ðyling = ðil(l)ing

+ðyll n. _air, breeze_, DR 121^18.

ðyllic pron. (such like), _such, such a_, AO, CP.

+ðyllic '_densus_,' OEG 5^4 (?= +ðiclic; or +ðýllic, from ðýn).

+ðylmêd _brought down, abased_, #LPs# 19^9.

ðýmel m. _thumb-stall, 'thimble,'_ _Lcd_.

ðýmele adj. _of the thickness of a thumb_, LL 110[49,3].

±ðýn I. _to press, squeeze, thrust, stab_: _coerce, restrain, oppress_.
[= ðyddan] II. = ðîn

±ðyncan (i) (impers. w. d.) pret. 3 sg. ðûhte _to appear, seem_, _Bo,
CP, El, Cr_; AO. mê ðyncð _methinks_, _Bo_. him ðûhte _it seemed good to
him_. [_Ger._ dünken]

±ðyncðo (usu. +) f. _dignity, rank, office_, Æ (i), CP: _meeting,
assembly_: _private arrangement (to defeat justice)_, LL 112[52].

ðynden = ðenden

±ðyngo _progress, promotion_, N: _propitiation_, DR 23^10.

ðynhl¯æne _wasted, shrunk_, WW 446^24.

ðynne (i) '_thin_,' _BH, RB_: _lean_, _Lcd, WW_: _not dense_, _Æ, BC_:
_fluid, tenuous_, _BH, Lcd, Met_: _weak, poor_, _BH, Lcd_.

ðynnes (i) f. _lack of density, tenuity, fluidity_, _Lcd_ 73b: _poverty,
feebleness (of sight)_, _Lcd_ 1·134. ['_thinness_']

±ðynnian (i) _to 'thin,' make thin, lessen, dilute_, _Æ, Lcd_: _become
thin_, ÆL.

ðynnol (u^2) _lean, thin_, WW 172^16.

ðynnung, ðynung f. _'thinning,' act of making thin_, _Lcd_ 98a.

ðynwefen _thin woven_, WW 439^34.

ðyrel (ý?) I. n. _hole, opening, aperture, perforation_, _BH, MtL, Sc,
WW_. II. adj. _pierced, perforated, full of holes_, CP. ['_thirl_';
durh]

ðyrelhûs n. _turner's workshop_, WW 185^31 (ðryl-).

ðyrelian = ðyrlian

ðyrelung f. _piercing_, CP 153^25.

ðyrelwamb _with pierced belly_, #Rd# 79^11.

ðyrf == ðearf

ðyrfe subj. pres. sing. of ðurfan.

ðyrl = ðyrel

ðyrlian _to perforate, pierce, excavate_, _Æ_ (i), _WW_. ['_thirl_']

-ðyrlic v. samod-ð.

ðyrn == ðorn

ðyrne f. _thorn-bush, bramble_, Æ; Mdf.

ðyrnen _thorny, of thorns_, _Æ, CP_. ['_thornen_']

ðyrnet n. _thorn, bramble, thorn-thicket_, OEG.

ðyrniht, ðyrnihte _thorny_, #Lcd#.

ðyrran _to dry, render dry_, #Rd# 29^4.

ðyrre _withered_: _dry_. [_Ger._ dürr]

ðyrs m. _giant, demon, wizard_, _B, Cp_; Mdf. ['_thurse_']

ðyrscel == ðerscel

ðyrscð pres. 3 sg. of ðerscan.

ðyrscwold = ðerscold

ðyrst = ðurst

+ðyrst _thirsty_, MH 170^6.

ðyrstan (pers. and impers.) _to 'thirst,' thirst after_, _G, Lcd, Sc_;
AO, CP. [ðurst]

+ðýrstgian = +ðrîstian

ðýs instr. smn. of ðês.

ðys- = ðis-

ðyslic = ðyllic

-ðyssa v. brim-ð.

ðýster == ðêostor

ðýstr- = ðêostr-

ðýt, ðýtt pres. 3 sg. of ðêotan.

-ðýtan v. â-ð. [_OHG._ dôzôn]

ðýðel (#LPs# 79^11) = ðýfel

ðyðer = ðider

ðýw- = ðêow-

±ðýwan _to press, impress_, Æ: _stab, pierce_: _crush, push, oppress,
check_: _threaten_.

+ðýwe = +ðêawe  [[headword spelled "ðeawe"]]

ðýwð = ðîefð

ðýwung f. _threat, threatening_, GD 238^15.




=U=


uce = wuce

ucu = wucu

ûder n. '_udder_,' WW 61^16.

udu (N) = wudu

ûf I. m. _owl_, #Gl#: _vulture_, #ÆGr# 48^17n. II. m. _uvula_, WW.

ufa = ufan

ufan (o) adv. _from above_, Æ, AO, CP: _over, above, on high_, CP.
on u.; u. on ðæt _besides_. on u. hærfest _in late autumn_. on u. midne
winter _after Christmas_. [_Ger._ oben]

ufancumende _coming from above_.

ufancund _from above, supreme, divine_, CP.

ufane = ufan

ufanweard adj. (often used w. d. as a prep.) _highest, topmost_, Æ.
ufanweardum _above, at the top_.

ufemest (superl. of uferra, ufor) _highest, uppermost, topmost_, _Æ_.
['_ovemest_']

ufen == ufan

ufenan, ufenon I. adv. _from above_, _Jn, W_. II. prep. _over and
above_, _DD_. on ufenan _upon the top of_. ['_ovenon_']

ufera = uferra

±uferian _to delay, put off_, Æ: (+) _raise up_, #Bk# 8: _extol,
honour_, Æ. [ufor]

uferra comp. adj. _above, higher, upper_, _BH_; CP: _outer_, _Lcd, WW_:
_after_ (of time), _later, future_, _AO, Lcd_; CP. ['_over_']

uferung f. _delay_, GD 245^8.

ufeweard I. adj. _upward, ascending, upper, higher up_, Æ, CP: _later_.
II. sb. _upper part, outside_, Æ.

ufewerd = ufeweard

uffrian = uferian

ufon == ufan

ufor adv. _higher, further away, further up_, Æ, CP: _later, posterior,
subsequent_.

ufora = uferra

ufur = ufor

uf-weard, -werd = ufeweard

uht = wuht = wiht fn.

ûht, ûhta (Æ) m. _twilight, dusk, early morning, dawn_. on ûhtan _at
daybreak_. tô ûhtes _towards dawn_: _nocturns_.

ûhtantîd = ûhttîd

ûhtantîma m. _time of nocturns_.

ûhtcearu f. _sorrow at dawn_, #Wif# 7.

ûhtentîd = ûhttîd

ûhtfloga m. _twilight-flier, dragon_, B 2760.

ûhtgebed n. _morning prayer, matins_.

ûhthlem m. _crash at dawn_, B 2007.

ûhtlic I. _morning, matutinal, of matins_. II. = ûtlic

ûhtsang m. _morning song, matins_, Æ: _nocturns_.

ûhtsanglic _nocturnal, used at nocturns_, CM 1014.

ûhtsceaða m. _twilight foe_, B 2271.

ûhttîd f. _twilight, early morning, dawn_.

ûhtðegnung f. _matins_, WW 129^33.

ûhtwæcca f. _night watch, vigils_, RB 40^10.

ûle f. '_owl_,' _Æ, Cp_.

ulf (#JnL# 10^12) = wulf

ulmtrêow n. _elm tree_, WW 138^12. [_L._ ulmus]

ûma I. m. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 103b. II. m. _a weaver's beam_, WW.

umb = ymb

umbe = ymbe

umbor ¶ n. _infant_.

umborwesende ¶ _being a child_, B.

un- I. negative or pejorative prefix. II. occasionally = on- (prefix
expressing reversal of a previous action) as in unbindan.

unâbeden neg. ptc. _unbidden_, Æ.

unâbêgendlic = unâbýgendlic

unâberendlic _intolerable, unbearable_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce, Æ, CP.

unâberiende _unbearable_, #Lcd# 3·260.

unâbêt = ungebêt  [[under "ungebêted"]]

unâbindendlic _indissoluble_, #Bo#.

unâblinn n. _irrepressible state, unceasing presence_, #Guth# 46^10.

unablinnend-e, -lic _unceasing, perpetual_. adv. -lîce, Æ, AO, CP.

unâboht = ungeboht

unâbrecendlic _inextricable_, WW 419^2.

unâbýgendlic (ê) _inflexible_, WW 421^30.

unâcenned _unbegotten_, ÆH 1·464^34.

unâcnycendlic _that cannot be untied or loosened_, DR 108^10. [cnyccan]

un-âcumendlic (Æ), -âcumenlic _unbearable, unattainable, impossible_.

unacumenlicnes f. _unbearableness_, RBL 114^9.

unâcwencedlic _inextinguishable, unquenchable_.

unâdrêogendlic _unendurable_.

unâdrûgod _undried, not dried, not hardened_, CP 383^32.

unâdrysn-ende, -en(d)lic _unquenchable_, NG.

un-âdw¯æsced, -âdw¯æscendlic, -âdwêscedlic _inextinguishable,
unquenchable_, Æ.

un¯æaðe = unêaðe

un¯æmta m. _want of leisure, work, occupation, hindrance_.

unæmtigian _to deprive of leisure_, AS 36^4.

unærh = unearg

unæsecgenlic (#EPs# 100^6) = unâsêðendlic?

un¯æt f. _gluttony_, Æ.

unætspornen _not hindered_, GD 60^26.

unæðelboren _not of noble birth, low-born_, Æ.

unæðele _of low birth, plebeian, ignoble, base_, CP.

unæðelian (an-) _to degrade, debase_, #Bo, Met#.

unæðelice adv. _ignobly, basely_, BH 442^11.

unæðelnes f. _ignobility_, GD 151^24.

un¯æwfæstlîce adv. _irreverently_: _unlawfully_.

un¯æwisc (ê) '_pudicus_,' WW 291^25.

unâfæhtendlic (N) = unâfeohtendlic

unâfandod _untried_, AS 32^7.

unâfeohtendlic (æ^3) _what cannot be contended against, inevitable_.

unâfîled _undefiled_, #LPs# 17^31.

unâfûliend = unfûliend

unâfunden _undiscovered_, Æ: _untried_.

unâ-fylledlic, -fyllendlic _that cannot be filled, insatiable_, Æ. adv.
-lîce.

unâga m. _one who owns nothing_, #PPs# 112^6.

unâg¯æledlîce _unremittingly_, #Bl# 121^5.

unâgân adj. _not lapsed, in force_, KC.

unâgelýfed = unâlýfed

unâgen _not one's own or under one's control, precarious_, CP.

unâgifen _unpaid_, TC 201^23.

unâgunnen _without a beginning_, ÆH.

unâhefendlic _unceasing, continual_, MFH 176.

un-âlîef-, -lê(a)f- = unâlýf-

unâlogen _not false, true_, NC 328.

un-âlýfed (CP), -lýfe(n)dlic (îe) _not allowed, unlawful, illicit_. adv.
-lîce _unlawfully, without permission_, #Sc#.

unâlýfednes (ê^2) f. _what is forbidden, licentiousness_, BH.

unâlýsendlic _without remission_, ÆH 1·500^18.

unâmælt _unmelted_, #Gl#.

unâmânsumod _not excommunicated, in church fellowship_, Æ.

unâmeten _unmeasured, unbounded_, Æ.

unâmetenlic _immeasurable, immense_, A 2·360.

unâmetgod _immeasurable, immense_, A 2·361.

unan- = unon-

unandcýðignes (o^2) f. _ignorance_, #JVPs# 24^7.

unandergildes = unundergilde

unandett _unconfessed_, W 71^7.

unandgytful _unintelligent, incapable, ignorant, foolish_.

unandhêfe (-hoife) _insupportable_, MtR 23^4.

unandweard _not present, absent_, Æ.

unandwendlic = unâwende(n)dlic

  [[Though the meanings are similar, "unâwendedlic" (under unâwend) and
  "unâwendendlic" (under unâwendende) are different words.]]

unandwîs _unskilful_, WW.

unangyttol = unandgytful

unânr¯ædnes f. _inconstancy_, #Bl# 31^34.

unâpînedlîce adv. _with impunity_, DR 113^15.

unâr f. _dishonour_, AO.

un-âræfned, -âræfne(n)dlic _not permissible, impracticable_, Æ:
_intolerable_.

unâreccendlic _unexplainable, wonderful_, #Sc# 26^15.

unârefnendlic (#VPs#) = unâræfnendlic  [[under "unâræfned"]]

unâreht _unexplained_, #Bo# 77^16.

+unârian _to dishonour_, AO.

unârîmed adj. _unnumbered, countless, innumerable_, AO.

unârîmedlic _innumerable, immeasurable_, AO. adv. -lîce, AO.

unârlic _dishonourable, dishonest, disgraceful_: _contrary to what is
fitting, unnatural (of a will)_, WW. adv. -lîce _dishonourably_:
_unmercifully_.

unarodscipe f. _remissness, cowardice_, CP 149^15.

unârwurðian (eo) _to dishonour_, Æ.

unârwurðlic _dishonourable_, NC 328.

unârwyrðnes f. _irreverence, indignity_, #Sc# 224^1.

unârýmed = unârîmed

unâsæcgendlic = unâsecgendlic

unâsædd = unâsedd

unâscended _unhurt_.

unâscruncen _not withered, undecayed_, DR 24^16.

unâscyrigendlic _inseparable_, ÆH 1·326^27.

unâscyrod _not separated_, WW 253^3.

unâsecgende _unspeakable, ineffable_, BH 264^30.

unâsecgendlic _indescribable, unspeakable, ineffable_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

unâsedd _unsatisfied, unsatiated_, #Gl#.

unâsêðenlic (#KGl#), -âsêðendlic _insatiable_.

unâsîwod (êo) _unsewed, without seam_, Jn 19^23.

unâsmêagendlic _inconceivable, inscrutable, unsearchable_, Æ.

unâsolcenlîce _diligently_, RB 20^19.

un-âsperiendlic (#KGl#), -âsporiendlic (GD) _unsearchable_.

unâspring-ende, -endlic (GD) _unfailing_.

unâstîðod _not hardened, not firm_, CP 383^32.

unâstyr-ed, -od _unmoved_, GD.

un-âstyriende, -âstyri(g)endlic adj. _immovable, firm_: _motionless_, Æ.

unâsundrodlic _inseparable_, DR.

unâswundenlîce adv. _diligently_, BH.

unâtaladlic (N) = unâtellendlic

unâteald _uncounted_.

unâtellendlic (ea) _innumerable_.

unâtemed _barbarous_, BH.

unâtemedlic _untameable, wild, fierce_, BH 162^28.

unâtêoriende _indefatigable_, OEG.

unâtêorigendlic _lasting, permanent, unceasing_, Æ: _indefatigable,
unwearied_. adv. -lîce.

unâtêorod _unwearied_, OEG.

un-âtêriend-, -toriend- = unâtêorigend-

unâtwêogendlîce = untwêogendlîce

unâðrêotend _unwearied, assiduous, persistent_, #Cr# 388.

unâðroten _unwearied, indefatigable, vigorous_, CP 171^9. adv.
-lîce, CP.

unâwægendlic _unshaken_, TC 319^9.

unâ-wæscen, -waxen _unwashed_, WW.

unâwemmed, -lic _unstained, spotless_, N.

unâwemmednes f. _incorruption_, A 8·330.

unâ-wend, -wended(lic) _unchangeable, unchanged, inviolate_.

unâwendend-e, -lic _unchangeable, unceasing_. adv. -lîce.

unâwerded (oe; = ie) _unhurt_, N.

unâwîdlod _undefined_, DR.

unâwriten _unwritten_, Æ.

un-bældo, -bældu = unbieldo

unbærende = unberende

unbald = unbeald

unbealaful _guiltless, innocent_, W.

unbeald (a) _cowardly, timid, weak, irresolute, distrustful_, CP.

unbealu n. _innocence_, #PPs# 100^2.

unbeboht _unsold_, AO 18^10.

unbebyriged _unburied_.

unbecêas _incontestable_, LL 112[53,1].

unbecrafod _unquestioned, not subject to claims_, LL 358[72].

unbecweden _unbequeathed_, TC.

unbeden _unbidden_, Æ.

unbe-fangenlic, -feonglic (BH 224^19 Ca) _unintelligible,
incomprehensible_, Æ.

unbefliten _undisputed_, EC 69´.

unbefohten _unopposed, unattacked_, #Ma# 57.

unbefôndlic _incomprehensible_, BH 224^19#o#.

unbegân _untilled_: _unadorned_.

unbegrîpendlic _incomprehensible_, #Bl#.

unbegunnen _without a beginning_, Æ.

unbehêafdod _not beheaded_, Æ.

unbehêfe _not suitable, inconvenient_, WW 508^34.

unbehelendlîce adv. _openly, without concealment_, W 138^3.

unbehelod _uncovered, naked_, Æ.

unbehrêowsigende _unrepenting_, Æ.

unbelimp = ungelimp

unbeorhte (y) _not brightly_, #Bo#.

unberêafigendlic _never to be taken away_, ÆL 23b^243.

unberende _unbearable_: _unfruitful, barren_.

unberendlic _unbearable_, #Lcd# 3·260^23.

unberendnes f. _barrenness_.

unbermed _unleavened, unfermented_. [beorma]

unbesacen (æ^2) _undisputed_.

unbes¯ændlic = unbesêondlic

unbesænged = unbesenged

unbescêawod _improvident, inconsiderate_. adv. -lîce.

unbescoren _unshorn_, RB 135^29.

unbesenced = unbesenged

unbesenged _not singed, unburnt_, W 25^19.

unbesêondlic (BH 224^19) = unbefôndlic?

unbesmiten _undefiled, pure, spotless_, Æ.

unbesmitennes f. _spotlessness_.

unbesorh _unconcerned, not interested_, ÆH 2·486^9.

unbêted _uncompensated, unexpiated, unatoned_, #Cr# 1312.

unbeðôhte adv. _unthinkingly_, CP 434^2.

unbeðyrfe ¶ _useless, idle, vain_.

unbeweddod _unbetrothed, unmarried_, Æ.

unbewelled _not boiled away_, #Lcd# 93b. [weallan]

unbiddende _not praying_, ÆH 1·156^4.

unbieldo (æ) f. _want of boldness, diffidence, timidity_, CP.

unbilewit (y^2) '_immitis_,' OEG 56^232.

unbindan^3 _to unbind, loose_, Æ: _pay_ (NG; trans. of '_solvere_'). [=
onbindan]

unbiscopod _not confirmed by a bishop_.

unbiðyrfe = unbeðyrfe

unblêoh _clean, bright_.

unbletsung f. _curse_, LL (310^35).

unblinnendlîce _incessantly_, BH 34^6.

unbliss f. _sorrow, affliction_, Æ.

+unblissian _to make unhappy_, NC 297.

unblîðe _joyless, sad, sorrowful_, CP: _unfriendly_.

unblîðemêde _sad of heart_, MtL 26^37.

unblôdig _bloodless_, GPH 395^16.

unblonden _unmixed_, DR 68^15.

unboht _unbought, free_, NG.

unboren _unborn_, Æ, CP.

unbrâd _narrow_.

unbræce ¶ _unbreakable, indestructible_.

unbræcen = unbrocen

un-brece, -bri(e)ce = unbryce

unbroc v. unbrocheard.

unbrocen _unbroken, whole, entire_.

unbrocheard _delicate, tender_.

unbrosn-igendlic (Æ), -endlic (GD) _indestructible, incorruptible_.

unbrosnodlîce _incorruptibly_, GD 348^23.

unbrosnung f. _incorruptibility_, Æ.

unbryce ¶ _unbreakable_: _indestructible, everlasting_. [brecan]

unbrýce _useless_. [brûcan]

unbrýde _honestly_, LL 400[2].

unbýed _uninhabited, desert_, NG.

unbyergo np. _uninhabited places_, DR 1^9.

unbyrged _unburied_, MH 28^21.

unbyrhte = unbeorhte

unbyrnende _without burning_, B 2548.

unc pers. pron. (d. a. dual) _us two_.

uncænned = unâcenned

uncâfscipe m. _sloth, neglect_, #Chr# 47.

uncamprôf _unwarlike_, GPH 399.

uncapitulod _without headings (to chapters)_, LL (204^1).

uncêaped _gratuitous, gratis_, MtL 10^8.

uncêapunga _gratuitously_, #Da# 746.

un-cêas, -cêast n? _oath of reconciliation_, LL 104[35].

uncenned = unâcenned

uncer I. g. dual of pers. pron. _of us two_. II. poss. pron. _belonging
to us two_.

uncet = unc

uncl¯æmod _unsmeared_, GPH 398.

un-cl¯æne, -cl¯ænlic _unclean, impure_, CP. adv. -lîce.

uncl¯ænnes f. _uncleanness, impurity_, AO, CP.

uncl¯æno f. _uncleanness_, NG.

±uncl¯ænsian _to soil, pollute_, AO, CP.

uncl¯ænsod _unpurified_, CP.

unclên- = uncl¯æn-

uncnyttan _to unbind, untie, loosen_, Æ. [cnotta]

un-coða m., -coðu f. _disease_, Æ.

uncræft m. _evil practice_, LL, W.

uncræftig _helpless_, DD 239.

uncrafod (LL 232, 14) = unbecrafod

uncre gdf. of uncer II.

uncristen _infidel_, BH 2·357.

uncumlîðe _inhospitable_, W 257^14.

uncûð _unknown, strange, unusual_, AO: _uncertain_, CP: _unfriendly,
unkind, rough_.

uncûða m. _stranger_.

uncûðlic _unknown_. adv. -lîce _in an unfriendly manner, unkindly_.

uncûðnes f. _strangeness_, GD 278^15.

uncwaciende _firmly_, CP 41^7.

uncweden _(unsaid), revoked_, WW 114^45.

uncwême _not pleasing_, MF 176.

uncweðende _speechless, inanimate_.

uncwisse _dumb_, BH 290^12.

un-cwyd, -cwydd _uncontested, undisputed_, LL.

uncýme _unseemly, mean, paltry, poor_.

uncynde _unnatural_, #Bo# 91^21#b#.

un-cynn, -cynlic, -cynelic _unsuitable, improper_.

uncýpe _gratuitous_, WW 514^31.

uncýped = uncêaped

un-cyst, -cyste f. _mistake, error_: _vice, wickedness, crime_, Æ, CP:
_stinginess, parsimony_, Æ: _disease_, #Lcd#. [cêosan]

uncystig _mean, stingy, niggardly_, Æ, CP.

uncýð = uncûð

uncýðig _ignorant, unacquainted with_: _devoid of_, #Gu# 1199.

un-cýðð, -cýððu f. _ignorance_, Æ, CP: _foreign country_.

und¯æd f. _wicked deed, crime_.

undæftelîce = ungedæftelîce

un-d¯æled, -dæld _undivided_, #Bo#.

undêaded _not deadened_, #Lcd# 3a.

undêadlic _immortal, for all eternity_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

undêadlicnes f. _immortality_, Æ.

undêagollîce = undêogollîce

undearnunga adv. _openly_.

undêað- = undêad-

undêaw _without dew_, #Lcd# 35a.

undeclînigendlic _indeclinable_, #ÆGr#.

undêd = und¯æd

undêogollîce (î) adv. _plainly, clearly_, CP.

undêop _shallow, low_, CP.

undêopðancol _shallow, silly_, ÆH 1·286^29.

undêor = undêore I.

undêore I. adj. _cheap_, CP. II. adv. _cheaply_.

undeornunga = undearnunga

under I. prep. w. d. and a. _'under,' beneath, among_: _before, in the
presence of_: _under the shelter of_, #Chr#: _in subjection to, under
the rule of_: _during_: _by means of, by_. swerian u. God _to swear by
God_. u. bæc = under-bæc. II. adv. _beneath, below, underneath_.

underâgendlic adj. '_subnixus_,' DR 182^16.

underandfônd (o^3, oe^4) '_susceptor_,' DR 193^6.

under-bæc, -bæcling adv. _backwards, back, behind_, Æ, CP.

underbêgan _to subject_, N. [bîegan]

underbeginnan^3 _to undertake, purpose_, Æ.

underberan^4 _to support, endure_.

under-br¯ædan, -bregdan _to spread under_.

underbûgan^2 _to submit (to)_, Æ.

underburh f. _suburb_, Æ (#Deut# 32^32).

underburhware mp. _dwellers in a suburb_.

undercerran _to overturn, subvert_, LkLR 23^2. [cierran]

undercing = undercyning

undercrammian _to stuff between, fill out underneath_, ÆH 1·430^4.

undercrêopan^2 _to be secretly grasped, seized by something_, Æ:
_penetrate, undermine_, GD.

undercuman^4 _to assist_, N.

under-cyning, -cyng m. _under-king, viceroy_, Æ.

underdelf n. _undermining_, #ASPs# 79^17.

underdelfan^3 _to dig under, undermine, break through_, Æ.

underdîacon m. _subdeacon_.

underdôn anv. _to put under_, Æ.

underdrencan _to choke by drowning_, MkL 5^13.

underdrifennes f. _subjection_, LkL p6^16.

underêade (N) = underêode, pret. 3 sg. of undergân.

undereoton (#Ruin# 6) = undereten pp. of underetan.

underetan^5 _to eat underneath, undermine, subvert_.

underfang '_susceptor_,' #SPs#.

underfangelnes = underfangenes

underfangen (pp. of underfôn) _neophyte_, ÆL 31^730.

underfang-enes, -elnes f. _undertaking, assumption_: _reception,
hospitality_, GD 76^22.

underfealdan '_subdere_,' EHy 6^30.

underfeng I. m. _undertaking, taking in hand_, CP 23^22. II. pret. 3 sg.
of underfôn.

underflôwan^7 _to flow under_, #Rd# 11^2.

underfolgoð m. _subordinate office_, AO 286^5#c#.

underfôn _to receive, obtain, take, accept_, Æ, AO, CP: _take in,
entertain_: _take up, undertake, assume, adopt_, Æ, AO, CP: _submit to,
undergo_: _steal_, GD, #Lcd#.

underfônd m. _one who takes anything in charge_, #LPs#.

underfônlic _to be received_, RBL 97^8.

underfyligan '_subsequi_,' LkL 23^55.

undergân anv. _to undergo_: _undermine, ruin_.

undergangan^7 = undergân

undergend- = underigend-

undergeoc _under the yoke, tame_, MkL 21^5.

undergerêfa m. _'proconsul,' deputy-governor_, Æ.

undergereord = underngereord

undergesett _placed under_, GD 307^12.

undergestandan^6 _to stand under_, LL 108[44].

undergeðêoded _subject_, LL 88´.

undergeðêodnes = underðêodnes

undergietan^5 (i, y) _to note, mark, understand, perceive_, AO.

underginnan^3 _to begin, undertake_, Æ.

undergitan (Æ) = undergietan

undergynnan = underginnan

undergytan (Æ) = undergietan

underhebban^6 _to bear, support, lift_, NG.

underhlystan _'subaudire,' to supply an omitted word_, #ÆGr# 151.

underhlystung f. _the act of supplying an omitted word_, #ÆGr# 151.

underhnîgan^1 _to submit to, undergo_, Æ, CP: _succumb to, sink under_.

underholung f. '_suffossum_,' LV^2 #Ps# 79^17.

underhwîtel m. _under-garment_, WW 187^21.

underhwr¯ædel = underwr¯ædel

underi-ende, -gende, -gendlic _inoffensive, harmless_, AO.

underiernan^3 _to run under_: '_succurrere_,' DR 43^8.

underlâttêow m. _consul_, AO 68^2#c#.

underlecgan _to underlay, prop, support_, Æ, CP.

underlicgan^5 _to underlie, to be subject to, give way to_, Æ.

underlihtan _to alleviate_, DR.

underling m. _underling, inferior_.

underlûtan^2 _to bow or bend under_: _support, sustain_, CP.

undermete = undernmete

undern m. _morning (from 9.0 a.m. to 12.0 noon)_: _the third hour_ (=
_9.0 a.m._; later, _11.0 a.m._), Æ.

underne = undierne

underneoðan (æ^3, y^3) adv. _underneath_, AO.

underngereord m. _morning meal, breakfast_, AO.

underngeweorc n. _breakfast_, GD 66^12.

undern-giefl, -gifl n. _repast, breakfast_, CP 322^19.

underniman^4 _to take in, receive, comprehend, understand_, Æ: _blame,
be indignant at_: _take upon oneself_, Æ: _steal_, #Lcd#.

underniðemest _lowest of all_, #Met# 20^35.

undernm¯æl n. _morning time_, Æ.

undernmete m. _morning meal, breakfast_, AO.

undernrest f. _morning rest_, MH 42^6.

undernsang m. _tierce (religious service about 9.0 a.m.)_.

undernsw¯æsendu np. _early meal_, BH 164^30.

underntîd f. _the third hour_ (= _9.0 a.m._), _noon, morning-time_, Æ:
_tierce_.

undernyðan (Æ) = underneoðan

underondfônd = underandfônd

underplantian '_supplantare_,' #Sc, SPs#.

undersang = undernsang

underscêotan^2 _to prop up, sustain, support_, CP: _intercept, pass
under_.

underscyte m. _passage underneath, transit_, Æ: _brake, drag-chain_, OEG
50^15.

undersêcan _to examine, investigate, scrutinize_, CP. [_Ger._
untersuchen]

undersettan '_supponere_,' #LPs# 36^24?

undersingan^3 '_succinere_,' #Gr# 181^2.

undersittan^5 '_subsidere_,' #ÆGr# 157^5.

undersmûgan^2 _to creep under, surprise_.

understandan^6 (o^3) _to 'understand,' perceive_, Æ, CP: _observe,
notice, take for granted_, ÆL 23b^186: '_subsistere_,' DR.

understandennes f. '_substantia_,' DR 31^20 (o^3).

understanding f. _intelligence_, #Sc# 221^13.

understapplian '_supplantare_,' #LPs# 16^13.

understaðolfæst = unstaðolfæst

understingan^3 _to prop up, support_, CP 113^11.

understond- = understand-

understrêdan _to strew under_, MH 18^21.

undersyrc m. _undershirt_, WW 379^30. [serce]  [[under "serc"]]

undertîd = underntîd

undertôdâl n. _secondary division_, #ÆGr# 291^5.

undertunge f. _'sublingua,' part under or behind the tongue,
tongue-ligament_, WW 264^17 (or ? two words, Cp, #LPs# 9^28; 65^17).

undertungeðrum _tongue-ligament_, _Lcd_. [v. '_thrum_']

underðencan _to consider_, CP 49^23: (refl.) _change one's mind,
repent_, LL 438[22] (æ^3).

underðênian _to serve under_, #Sc# 5^6.

underðêod _subjected, subject_: _assistant, suffragan_.

underðêodan (îe, ý) _to subjoin, add_: _subjugate, subject, subdue,
reduce, degrade_, Æ, CP: _support_, OEG 4339.

under-ðêodendlic, -ðêodenlic _subjunctive_, #ÆGr#.

underðêodnes f. _subjection, submission, obedience_, Æ.

underðêow m. _subject, slave_, AO.

underðîedan (AO, CP) = underðêodan

underðîednes (î^3) = underðêodnes

underðýdan = underðêodan

underweaxan^6 '_succrescere_,' #Sc# 104^8.

underwedd n. _deposit, pledge_, Æ.

underwendan '_subvertere_,' #Sc# 196^6.

underweorpan '_subjicere_,' #EPs# 143^2.

underwr¯ædel m? _waistband_, WW 153^1.

underwreðian (eo, i, y) _to support, sustain, uphold, strengthen,
establish_, Æ, CP.

underwreðung f. _propping up, support, sustentation_.

underwrîtan _to write at the foot of, subscribe_, BH 312^30.

under-wriðian, -wryðian = underwreðian

underwyrtwalian '_supplantare_,' #EPs# 17^40.

underýcan _to add_, A 13·385^292. [îecan]

underyrnan = underiernan

undierne (i, y) I. _open, manifest, clearly known_: _public,
nuncupatory_. II. adv.

undîgollîce = undêogollîce

undîlegod _unerased_, CP 423^23.

undolfen _untilled_, GD 202^4.

undôm m. _unjust judgment, injustice_.

undômlîce _indiscreetly_, #Sc# 202^15.

undôn anv. _to undo, open, loose, separate_, Æ: _cancel, discharge,
abrogate_.

undrêfed _untroubled, undisturbed, undefiled_, CP 31^3.

undrifen _not driven or tossed_, LL 222[2].

undruncen _sober_, CP 295^8.

undrysnende _inextinguishable_, MtL 3^12.

undýre = undêore

undyrne = undierne

unêacen (ê) _barren_, OEG 27^31.

unêacniendlic _unfruitful, sterile_, OEG 1030.

unearfoðlîce adv. _without difficulty_, OEG.

un-earg, -earh (Æ), -earhlic (Æ) _not cowardly, dauntless, bold, brave_.

unêaðe I. adj. _not easy, difficult, hard, disagreeable, grievous_. II.
adv. Æ.

unêaðelic _difficult, hard, impossible_: _troublesome_, MP 1·611. adv.
-lîce.

unêaðelicnes (ý^2) f. _difficulty_.

unêað-l¯æce, -l¯æcne, -lâcne _not easily cured_, #Lcd#.

unêaðmylte _indigestible_, #Lcd# 82b.

unêaðnes (ê, îe) f. _difficulty, inconvenience, trouble, worry_, Æ:
_severity, harshness_.

unêawfæstlîce = un¯æwfæstlîce

un-efen, -efn, -efenlic _unequal, unlike_: _anomalous, irregular_,
#ÆGr#. adv. -efne.

un-êmetta, -êmota = un¯æmta

unemn = unefen

unendebyrdlîce _in a disorderly manner_, CP.

unered _unploughed, uncultivated_, WW 147^3.

unêstful _ungracious_, WW 191^17.

unêð- = unêað-, unîeð-

unêwisc = un¯æwisc

unf¯æcne (â) _without malice, sincere, honest, faithful_.

unfæderlîce adv. _in an unfatherly manner_, W 106^6.

unf¯æge ¶ _not fated to die_.

unfæger _not beautiful, unlovable, unlovely, deformed, ugly, hideous_.

unfægernes (e) _ugliness_, GD 279^15: _abomination_, MtL 24^15.

unf¯æglic _not fatal_, #Bo# 107^29.

unfægre (¯æ) adv. _unfairly, foully_.

unf¯æhð f. _peace_, (_dropping of a feud_), LL 100[28].

unf¯æle _wicked, unlovely, unholy, evil_.

unfæst _not fixed, not firm, loose, unsteady, tottering_, CP.

unfæstende _not fasting_, LL (252^1).

unfæstlîce adv. _not firmly, vaguely, indistinctly_, CP 156^13.

+unfæstnian _to be without aim, ineffective_, MFH 165.

unfæstr¯æd _unstable, inconstant_, CP.

unfæstr¯ædnes f. _inconstancy_, CP.

unfæsð- = unfæst

unfâh _exempt from hostility, not under a ban_, LL 186[1,1].

unfealdan^7 _to unfold, open_.

unfeax _without hair, bald_.

unfêcne = unf¯æcne

unfêferig _not feverish_, #Lcd# 1·164^18.

unfeger- = unfæger-

unfêlende _unfeeling, callous_, #Lcd# 99a.

unfenge _not acceptable_, MF 176.

un-feor, -feorr adv. _not far from, near_.

unfeormigende (on-) _inexpiable_, ÆL 23b^426.

unfêre _disabled, invalided_.

unfêrnes f. _impotence, infirmity_, MLN 4·5.

unflitme adv.? _unreservedly_? B 1097.

un-flycge, -fligge _unfledged_, OEG 28^13.

unforbærned _unburnt_, Æ, AO.

unforboden _unforbidden, lawful_, Æ.

unforbûgendlic _unavoidable_. adv. -lîce _without turning away_, ÆL
23b^431.

unforburnen _unburnt_, ÆH 2·480^7.

unforcûð _reputable, good, honourable, noble, brave_, CP. adv. -lîce.
[fracoð]

unfordytt _unobstructed_, OEG 3613.

unforebyrdig _impatient_, #Sc# 8^13.

unfored (od) _unbroken_, Æ.

unforedlic (o^3) _indissoluble_, OEG.

unforesceaw-od, -odlic _inconsiderate, hasty_.

unforfeored _unbroken_? WW 231^33.

unforgifen _unforgiven_, CP: _not given in marriage_.

unforgitende _unforgetting, mindful_, #Guth# 76^22.

unforgolden _unpaid_, Æ.

unforhæfednes (fd) f. _incontinence_.

unforhladen _unexhausted_, WW 255^39.

unforht adj. _fearless, bold_. adv. -e, -lîce.

unforhtigende _fearless_, ÆH 2·140^29.

unforhtmôd _fearless_, Æ.

unforl¯æten (ê) _not left_, NG.

unformolsnod neg. ptc. _uncorrupted, undecayed_, Æ.

unformolten _unconsumed_, ÆH 1·488^7.

unforod = unfored

unforrot-edlic (#HGl#), -iendig (ÆP 14^7), -iendlic (OEG)
_incorruptible_.

unforscêawodlîce _unawares_: _inconsiderately, hastily_.

unfor-spornen, -spurned _not hindered_, GD 60^28.

unforsw¯æled _unburnt_, ÆH 2·20^15.

unforswîgod _not passed over in silence_, ÆL 23b^35.

un-forswiðen, -forswýðed _unconquered_.

unfortredde sb. _the plant which cannot be killed by treading, polygonum
aviculare, knot-grass_.

unfortreden _not destroyed by treading_, #Lcd# 3·299´.

unforwandigendlîce adv. _unhesitatingly, boldly_.

unforwandodlic adj. _unhesitating, fearless_, CP. adv. -lîce
_unhesitatingly, fearlessly, recklessly_, CP: _unswervingly_.

unforwealwod _unwithered_, #Bl# 73^25.

unforwordenlic _undecayed_, OEG.

unforworht I. _innocent_. II. _unrestricted, free_, KC.

unforwyrded _undecayed_, NC 351.

un-fracodlîce, -fracoðlîce _honourable, becomingly, fitly_, #Bo#.

unfratewod _unadorned, unpolished_, GPH 396. [frætwian]
  [[under "frætwan"]]

unfremful _unprofitable_, Æ.

unfremu f. _damage, hurt_.

unfrêondlîce _unkindly_, #Gen# 2689.

unfricgende _unquestioning_, #Gen# 2649.

unfrið m. _breach of peace, enmity, hostilities, war_, AO: _state of
being outside the king's peace_.

unfriðflota m. _hostile fleet_, #Chr# 1000#e#.

unfriðhere m. _hostile army_, #Chr#.

unfriðland n. _hostile land_, LL 222[3,1].

unfriðmann m. _man of a hostile country_, LL 222[3,3].

unfriðscip n. _hostile ship_.

unfrôd _not aged, young, inexperienced_, B 2821.

unfrôforlîce _uncontestably_, OEG 56^187?

unfrom ¶ _inert_.

unfûl '_insulsum_' (?) MkLR 9^50.

unfulfremed _imperfect_, Æ.

unfulfremednes f. _imperfection_, CP.

unfulfremming f. _imperfection_, #LPs# 138^16.

un-fûliend (#HGl#), -fûliendlic (OEG) _incorruptible_.

unfullod _unbaptized_, LL.

unfulworht _imperfect, unfinished_, RB 20^3.

unfyrn adv. _not long ago_: _soon_.

ungænge _useless, vain_, MtR 15^6.

ungan = ongan pret. 3 sg. of onginnan.

ungeændod = ungeendod

unge¯æsce _unheard of_.

un-ge¯æwed (-i¯æwed) _unmarried_, OEG 5248.

ungeandett _without confession_, W 135^32.

ungêara adv. _not long ago, lately, recently_: _soon, shortly_.

ungearo = ungearu

ungearu, gsm. ungear(o)wes _unready, unprepared, untilled_, AO, CP. on
ungearwe _unawares_, AO.

ungearwyrd _not respected_, WW 421^32.

ungêaðe = unêaðe

ungeâxod _unasked_, ÆH 1·428^6.

ungebarde = ungebierde

ungebêaten _unbeaten, unwrought_, Ln 23^5.

ungebêgendlic = ungebîgendlic

ungebeorhlîce _rashly_? _intemperately_? ÆH 2·322^26.

unge-bêt(ed), -bett _unatoned for_, CP: _unacquitted_, EC 217.

ungebierde (a, y) _beardless_.

ungebîged _unbent_, OEG 2977.

ungebîgendlic _inflexible_: _indeclinable_, #ÆGr#.

ungebleoh _of different colours, unlike_, #ÆGr#.

ungeblêtsod _unblessed_, #Jul# 492.

ungeblýged _intrepid_, #Gu# 913. [blêoh]

ungeboden _without being summoned_.

ungeboht _unbought, unbribed_, LL 398[8].

ungeboren _yet unborn_, LL 126 Pro.

ungebrocen _unbroken_, WW 398^32.

ungebrocod _unafflicted, uninjured_, Æ.

ungebrosnendlic _undecaying_, BH, GD.

ungebrosnod _not spoiled, uncorrupted, undecayed_, Æ.

ungebrosnung f. _incorruption_, #Sc# 71^2.

ungebunden _unbound_, #ÆGr# 14^13; GD 214^16.

ungebyrde I. _uncongenial_, #Bo# 92^22. II. = ungebierde

ungebyredlic _incongruous_, DR 179^17.

ungecindelic = ungecyndelic

ungecl¯ænsod _unclean, impure_, Æ.

ungecnâwen _unknown_, #ApT# 17^13.

ungecnyrdnes f. _negligence, indifference, idleness_, ÆH 2·552^35.

ungecoplic _unsuitable, unbefitting, troublesome_. adv. -lîce, #Sc#
80^14.

ungecoren _reprobate_. u. âð _oath taken by a body of persons generally_
(_opposed to_ cyreâð), LL.

ungecost _reprobate_, BH 480^4.

ungecwême _unpleasing, disagreeable_, #Sc# 38^15.

ungecyd _unsaid, not declared_, LL 212[9].

ungecynde _unnatural, alien_.

unge-cyndelic, -cyndlic, -cynelic _unnatural, monstrous, terrible_. adv.
-lîce.

ungecyrred _unconverted_, #Lcd# 3·442^1.

ungedæftelîce = ungedæftlîce

ungedæftenlic = ungedafenlic

ungedæftlîce adv. _unseasonably, inopportunely_, CP 97^16.

ungedæftnes f. _untimely intervention or interruption_, CP 97^19.

ungedafenlic _improper, unseemly_, Æ: _unseasonable_? _troublesome_? CP
(v. A 33·272). adv. -lîce _improperly, unduly, unreasonably, unjustly,
unsuitably_.

ungedafenlicnes f. _unfitness, inconvenience_, #CPs# 9^22.

ungedafniendlic (#HGl# 492) = ungedafenlic

ungedallic _infinite, without end_, GD 337^11.

ungedêfe _improper, not fitting, disagreeable_. adv. -lîce.

unge-dêfelic, -dêflic = ungedafenlic

unge-dered, -derod (Æ) _unhurt, uninjured, unmolested_.

ungederstig = ungedyrstig

ungedrehtlîce adv. _indefatigably_, WW 428^3.

ungedrýme _inharmonious, discordant_. [drêam]

ungedwimorlîce _clearly, without any delusion_, NC 328.

ungedyrstig _timid_, CP 209^10.

ungeeahtendlic (æ, e) _inestimable_: _indescribable_.

ungeended = ungeendod

ungeendigendlic _infinitive_, #ÆGr#: _infinite_.

unge-endod (CP), -endodlic _unending, endless, infinite, boundless_.

ungefæd (a) _want of reason_, NC 328.

ungef¯æglic = unf¯æglic

ungef¯ær- = ungefêr-

ungefandod _untried, having no experience in_, CP.

ungefaren _impassable, without a road_, #BlPs#.

ungefêa m. _unhappiness_, NC 328.

ungefêalîce _miserably_, #Chr# 755.

ungefêge _unfit, improper_, WW 191^22.

unge-fêle, -fêled _without feeling_, #Lcd#.

ungefêre I. _impassable_: _impenetrable, inaccessible_, CP. II. adv.
_impassably_.

ungefêred _inaccessible_.

ungefêrenlic _unfrequented_? #Nar# 17^7.

ungefêrlic _unsocial, internecine_. adv. -lîce _in civil war_.

ungefêrne _impassable_, #VPs# (oe).

ungefeðered _not feathered_, WW 427^16.

unge-fôg, -fôh I. _immoderate, excessive_, Æ: _overbearing,
presumptuous, unbending_, Æ. II. n. _excess_, NC 329. adv. -fôge
_excessively_, AO.

unge-fôglic (AO), -fôhlic _fierce, strong_: _immense_. adv. -lîce.

ungefr¯æg-e, -elic _unheard of, unusual, inconceivable_. adv. -lîce.

ungefrætwod _unadorned_, WW 419^11.

ungefrêdelîce adv. _insensibly, callously_, CP 265^16.

ungefrêglîce = ungefr¯æglîce  [[under "ungefr¯æge"]]

ungefremed _unfinished_, Æ.

ungefremmung (on-) f. _imperfection_, #RPs# 138^16.

ungefullod I. _unfulfilled_, #Rd# 60^14. [fullian] II. = ungefulwod

ungefulwod _unbaptized_.

unge-fyld, -fylle(n)d(lic) _insatiable_.

ungefynde _worthless, barren, sterile_? CP 411^19.

ungefyrn adv. _not long hence, not long ago, not long after_, Æ.

ungegearwe = ungearwe, v. ungearu.

unge-gearwod (DR), -gerad (MtR) _not clothed_.

ungeglenged _unadorned_, OEG 1210.

ungegrêt _ungreeted_, #Guth# 22^20.

ungehâdod _not ordained, not belonging to an order (used of men and
women)_.

un-geh¯ælendlic, -geh¯æledlic adj. _incurable_, VHy.

ungeh¯æmed _unmarried_, OEG 1174.

ungehæplic _unsuitable, unfit_, A 8·452.

ungehâlgod _unhallowed, unconsecrated_, Æ.

ungehâten _unpromised, unbidden_, #Bl# 189^27.

ungehêafdod _not having come to a head_, #Lcd# 1·92^23.

ungehealdsum _unchaste_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

ungehealdsumnes f. _incontinence, unchastity_, Æ.

ungehealtsum == ungehealdsum

ungehefegod '_non...gravis_,' OEG 27^31.

ungehende (æ^3) _remote_, HL 12^8.

ungehendnes f. _remoteness, distance_, #ÆGr# 14^19.

ungeheort (y) _disheartened_, Æ.

ungehêred = ungehýred

unge-hîersum (CP), -hîrsum (Æ) _disobedient, rebellious_.

ungehîrsumnes (ý) f. _disobedience_, Æ.

ungehîrsumod (ý) _disobedient_, RBL 12^8.

unge-hîwod, -hîwodlic _unformed, not fashioned, unshapen_: _unfeigned,
genuine_.

ungehlêoðor _inharmonious_, WW 224^7.

ungehrepod _untouched_, Æ.

ungehrinen _untouched_, BH, GD.

ungehw¯æde _much_, #Lcd# 53b.

ungehw¯ærnes = ungeðw¯ærnes

ungehýred (ê^3) _unheard of, untold_, BH 40^33.

ungehýrnes f. _hardness of hearing, deafness_, #Lcd#.

ungehýr- = unge-hîer-, -hîr-

ungehyrt = ungeheort

ungel m. _fat, tallow, suet_, Æ.

ungelâcnod _unhealed_, #Guth# 66^16.

ungelâdod _not acquitted_, EC 217.

ungelæccendlic _unreprovable_, #Sc# 119^11.

ungel¯æred _untaught, illiterate, unlearned, ignorant, rude_, Æ, CP. adv.
-lîce.

ungel¯æredlic _unteachable_, GD 110^21.

ungel¯ærednes f. _unskilfulness, ignorance_, CP.

ungelaðod _uninvited_, ÆH 1·128^18.

ungelêaf _unbelieving_, #PPs# 67^19.

ungelêafa m. _unbelief_.

ungelêafful _unbelieving_, Æ, CP.

ungelêaffullic _unbelieving_: _incredible_. adv. -lîce.

ungelêaffulnes f. _unbelief_.

ungelêaflic _incredible_, Æ.

ungelêafsum _unbelieving_.

ungelêafsumnes f. _unbelief, infidelity, heathenism_, BH 70^25.

ungelêf- = ungelîf-

ungelêofa = ungelêafa

ungelîc _unlike, different, dissimilar, diverse_, CP. adv. -lîce.

ungelîca m. _one unlike others_, ÆL 7^28.

ungelîclic _improper_. adv. -lîce.

ungelîcnes f. _unlikeness, difference_, CP.

ungelîef- = ungelîf-

ungelîfed (ý) I. _unbelieving_, Æ. II. _illicit_, BH 2·229.

ungelîf-edlic, -endlic (îe, ý) _incredible, extraordinary_. adv. -lîce.

ungelîfend (ê) m. _unbeliever_, NG.

ungelîfnes (ê) f. _unbelief_, NG.

ungeligen = ungelygen

ungelimp nm. _mishap, misfortune_, Æ.

ungelimplic _inconvenient, unfortunate, disastrous_, Æ: _abnormal,
unreasonable_. adv. -lîce.

ungelýf- = ungelîf-

ungelygen _not lying, true_, LL.

ungêm- = ungým-

ungemaca m. _'impar,' not a match_, #ÆGr#.

ungemæc _unlike_, GD 91^15; WW 223^35.

ungemæt == ungemet

ungem¯æte I. _immense_. II. adv. _immensely_.

ungem¯ætlic _excessive_, AO 28^27.

ungemêde _unbearable, unpleasant_. #Mod# 25.

ungemêdnes f. _adversity_, DR 63^13.

ungemeltnes f. _indigestion_, #Lcd# 68b.

ungemenged _unmixed, pure_, #Bo# 100^31.

ungemengednes f. _purity_.

ungemet n. _excess, superfluity_: _immensity_: _want of moderation_.

ungemêt _not met with, unknown_, OEG 2488.

ungemete I. adj. _huge_, GD 12^9. II. adv. _excessively, immeasurably,
immoderately, extremely, very_.

ungemetegod (Æ) = ungemetgod

ungemetelice = ungemetlice  [[form of "ungemetlic"?]]

ungemetes = ungemete II.

ungemetfæst _not moderate, intemperate, excessive_: (¶) _very firm_.

ungemetfæstnes f. _excess, intemperance_, #Bo# 109^9.

ungemetgod _out of due proportion, excessive_, CP: _unbridled,
intemperate_.

ungemetgung f. _excess, want of moderation_, Æ, CP.

ungemetlic _immeasurable, immense_, AO: _excessive, immoderate,
violent_. adv. -lîce, AO, CP.

ungemetnes f. _extravagance_, OET 180^3.

ungemetum adv. = ungemete

ungemîdlod _unrestrained, unbridled_, Æ.

ungemiht _without strength, weak_.

ungemihtig = unmihtig

ungemindig = ungemyndig

ungemôd _discordant, dissentient, quarrelsome_, CP.

ungemôdignes f. _contentiousness_, W 8^15n.

ungemôdnes f. _strife_, CP 344^9.

ungemolsnod _undecayed_, MH 78^1.

ungemunecod _not made a monk_, LL (142^4).

ungemylt _undigested_, #Lcd# 2·284.

ungemynd f. _madness_, #Lcd#.

ungemyndig (w. g.) _unmindful, forgetful, heedless (of)_, Æ.

ungenæmnedlic _unexpected_, GD 341^13.

ungenîdd (ê, îe) _uncompelled_, AO, CP.

ungeocian _to unyoke_, #ÆGr# 277^3.

ungeorne _negligently_: _unwillingly_, AO.

ungeornful _indifferent, remiss, slothful_, CP.

ungerâd I. (w. g.) _ignorant, foolish, unskilled, unfit_, Æ, CP: (w. d.)
_at variance, wrong, discordant, dissentient_, Æ, AO: _ill-conditioned,
rude_, Æ. II. n. _discord_, CP: _folly_, Æ.

ungerâdnes (¯æ) _disagreement_, #Lcd#.

unger¯æd == ungerâd

unger¯æde _foolish_, MF 176. adv. -lîce _sharply, roughly, violently_.

unger¯ædnes f. _disagreement, sedition_, AO.

ungerec n. _tumult_, BH.

ungereccan _to clear oneself of an accusation_, LL 168[1,2].

ungereclic _unruly, unrestrained_, #Bl# 19^6 adv. -lîce _confusedly,
recklessly_.

ungerêdelîce = unger¯ædlîce  [[form of "unger¯æde"]]

ungerênod _not ornamented_, TC 515^26. [regnian]

ungereord _uninstructed, barbarous_, WW 193^3.

ungereordedlic _insatiable_, #Ps#.

ungereordod _unfed, empty_, Æ.

ungerepod = ungehrepod

ungerian = ungierwan

ungeriht = unriht

ungerihte _uncorrected, unreformed_, NC 329.

ungerîm I. n. _countless number, host_, Æ. II. countless, untold, Æ.

unge-rîmlic, -rîmed(lic) _countless, untold_.

ungerinen = ungehrinen

ungerinselîce = ungerisenlîce

ungerîped _immature, too early_, Æ.

ungerisedlîce = ungerisenlîce

ungerîsende _indecent_, OEG 3673.

ungerisene I. _unseemly, improper_: _incongruous, inconvenient_. II. =
ungerisnu

ungerisenlic _unbecoming, improper_, CP. adv. -lîce, CP.

ungerisnes (uni-) f. _impropriety_, #HGl# 507.

ungerisnu n. (often pl.) _inconvenience_: _impropriety, indignity,
disgrace_, AO.

ungerwan = ungierwan

ungerýde I. _rough, boisterous, harsh_. II. n. _rough place_, Lk 3^5.

ungerýdelic _rough, violent_, GD 265^2; LV 47. adv. -lîce _suddenly,
impetuously_, Æ.

ungerýdnes f. _noise, tumult_, #Sc# 82^2.

ungesadelod = unsadelod

unges¯ælig _unhappy, unfortunate_, Æ, AO, CP. adv. -lîce _unhappily_:
_wickedly_.

unges¯ælignes f. _unhappiness, misfortune_, BH, #Bl#.

unges¯ællîce = unges¯æliglîce  [[form of "unges¯ælig"]]

unges¯ælð f. _trouble, misfortune, unhappiness, sorrow_, CP.

ungesawen = ungesewen

ungesawenlic = ungesewenlic  [[under "ungesewen"]]

ungescaðignes = ungesceððignes

ungescêad I. n. _want of intelligence, senselessness_. II. adj.
_unreasonable_. III. adv. _exceedingly_, #Da# 243. [cp. _Ger._ gescheit]

ungescêadlic _unreasonable, indiscreet_. adv. -lîce _unreasonably,
absurdly_.

ungescêad-wîs, -wîslic _unintelligent, irrational, imprudent, foolish_,
Æ, CP. adv. -lîce.

ungescêadwîsnes f. _want of intelligence, indiscretion, folly,
ignorance_, CP.

un-gesceapen, -gescepen neg. ptc. _uncreated, unformed_, Æ.

ungescended _unhurt_, DR 146^11.

ungesceððed _unhurt_, BH 218^25.

ungesceððignes (a) f. _innocence_, MFH (Vesp. D xiv).

ungescr¯æpe _inconvenient, useless_.

ungescr¯æpnes (ê) f. _discomfort_, BH 322^30.

ungescr¯æpo n. _inconvenience_, BH 382^3.

ungesegenlic = ungesewenlic  [[under "ungesewen"]]

ungeseht adj. _at variance_, FM 358^28.

ungesêl- = unges¯æl-

ungesêne = ungesýne

ungesênod _not signed with the cross_. [segn]

ungesêonde _blind_, #Lcd# 1·368^24.

ungeseowenlic = ungesewenlic  [[under "ungesewen"]]

unge-sewen, -sewen(d)lic _unseen, invisible_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce.

ungesibb (¶) _not related_: _unfriendly, hostile_, #Bl#, BH.

ungesibsum _not peaceable, quarrelsome, contentious_, CP.

ungesibsumnes f. _quarrelsomeness, discord_, CP 351^1.

ungesilt = unsealt

ungesoden _unsodden, unboiled_, #Lcd#.

ungesom _at variance_, ÆH 1·478^25.

ungespêdig = unspêdig

ungestæððe- = ungestæððig-

ungestæððig _unsteady, inconstant, unstable, fickle_, CP. adv. -lîce.

ungestæððignes f. _inconstancy, frivolity_, CP.

ungestrêon n. _ill-gotten treasure_, W 183^9.

ungestroden _not subject to confiscation_, LL 12[4,1].

ungesundlîce _excessively, exceedingly_, GD 15^2.

ungeswêge _inharmonious, dissonant, discordant, out of tune, harsh_,
#Gl#.

ungeswenced _unceasing_, NC 329.

ungeswencedlic _unwearying_, BH 436^16.

ungeswicendlîce _incessantly_.

ungeswuncen _not laboured over, not well done_, WW 430^11.

ungesylt = unsealt

ungesýne (ê) _unseen, invisible_, WW 17^46.

ungesýnelic _invisible_, #Bl#.

unget¯æse I. n. _trouble, hardship, severity_, CP. II. adj. _troublesome,
inconvenient_.

unget¯æslîce adv. _inconveniently_, AS 29^20.

unget¯æsnes f. _unsuitableness, inconvenience_, WW 419^38.

ungetel _innumerable_.

ungetemed = unâtemed

ungetemprung f. _inclemency_, CM 461.

ungetêoriendlic _inexhaustible_. adv. -lîce _incessantly_, LL.

ungetêorod _unfailing_, Æ.

ungetêse = unget¯æse II.

unge-tîmu f? -tîme n? _evil time, adversity, mishap_, AO, GD.

ungetinge (Æ), ungetingful (GPH) _not eloquent_. [tunge]

ungetogen _uneducated_, Æ.

ungetrêowe (î, îe, û, ý) _untrue, faithless_, Æ.

ungetrêownes f. _unbelief_, CP 447^6.

ungetrêowsian = untrêowsian

ungetrêowð f. _unfaithfulness, treachery_, W 160^6.

ungetrum _weak, infirm_, #Bo# 132^32.

unge-trûw-, -trýw- = un(ge)trêow-

ungetw¯ære (WW 248^17) = ungeðw¯ære

ungetwêogendlîce (GD 231^21) = untwêogendlîce

unge-týd, -týdd _ignorant, untaught, unskilful_, CP.

ungetyred = ungetêorod

ungeðæslic _unfit, improper, unseemly_, WW 191^23.

ungeðanc mn. _evil thought_, W.

ungeðancful _unthankful, ungrateful_, W 241^4.

ungeðeaht n. _evil counsel_, RB 118^10.

ungeðeahtendlîce _hastily_, BH 124^13.

ungeðêawe adv. _not customary_, #Guth# 72^17.

ungeðêawfæst _ill-regulated_, RBL 14^16.

ungeðêod _disunited, separate_, #Gen# 1698.

ungeðinged _unexpected_, CP 317^13.

ungeðungen _base_, #Nar# 42^12.

ungeðw¯ære I. _disagreeing, quarrelsome, troublesome, stubborn,
vexatious, undutiful, irreverent_, Æ, CP. II. n. _disturbance_, MtR
26^5.

ungeðw¯ærian _to be discordant, disagree, be at variance with_, Æ.

ungeðw¯ærlic _inharmonious, discordant_, RB 19^2: _hostile_, GD 349. adv.
-lîce _peevishly_.

ungeðw¯ærnes f. _disturbance, quarrel, discord_, AO.

ungeðwêre = ungeðw¯ære

ungeðyld fn. _impatience_, CP. [ðolian; _Ger._ ungeduld]

ungeðyldelîce adv. _impatiently_, #Bo#.

ungeðyldig _impatient_, Æ, CP. [_Ger._ ungeduldig]

ungeðylð = ungeðyld

ungeðyre '_discensor_'? Cp 283#d#.

ungewæder = ungewider  [[form of "ungewidere"?]]

ungewæm- = ungewem-

ungew¯æpnod _without weapons, unarmed_, Æ.

ungewealden _disordered (of the stomach)_, #Lcd#.

un-gewealdes, -gewaldes adv. _involuntarily, by chance_, CP.

ungeweaxen _not full grown, immature_, WW 352^27.

ungeweder = ungewider  [[form of "ungewidere"?]]

un-gewemmed (Æ), -gewemmedlic _unspotted, unblemished, undefiled,
uninjured_. adv. -lîce _uncorruptly_, BH 276^20.

ungewem(med)nes f. _freedom (from stain)_.

ungewende(n)dlic _immovable_, GD, #Lcd#.

ungewendnes f. _unchangeableness_.

ungewêned _unexpected_.

ungewênedlic _unhoped for_, GD 347^14.

un-gewêrged, -gewêrigod _unwearied, untiring_.

un-gewidere n., gs. -gewidres _bad weather, storm_.

ungewiderung f. _bad weather_, #ChrR# 1086.

ungewild (y) _unsubdued_, OEG.

ungewilde (y) _not subject to, independent of_, AO: _untamed,
unbridled_. [geweald]  [[listed as "+weald"]]

ungewildelic (y) _unyielding_, Æ.

un-gewill _displeasing_, #Chr#.

ungewintred _immature, young_, LL 18[26].

ungewirhtum = ungewyrhtum

ungewis = ungewiss

ungewislic _unaccustomed_, #Bo# 15^22n.

ungewîsnes f. _uncertainty, ignorance_, BH.

ungewiss I. n. _uncertainty, ignorance_, Æ, AO: _unconsciousness_:
_ignominy, shame_, #SPs# 82^15. II. adj. _uncertain_, Æ, CP: _unwise,
ignorant_: _doubtful_, Æ: _causing shame, shameful_, #KGl# 75^10.

ungewisses _unconsciously, involuntarily_, CP.

ungewîtendlic _permanent, imperishable_, ÆL 34^258. adv. -lîce
_permanently, perpetually_, CP 441^21.

ungewitfæstnes f. _madness_, #Lcd# 82b.

ungewitful _unwise, senseless, mad_, CP.

ungewitfulnes f. _madness_, CP 185^1.

ungewitlic _stupid, foolish_, #Lcd# 65a.

ungewîtnigendlîce _freely, with impunity_, #ÆGr# 233^6n.

ungewîtnod _unpunished_, Æ, CP.

ungewitt n. _folly, madness_, Æ.

ungewittig _irrational, foolish, mad_, Æ.

ungewittiglîce (-witte-) _unwisely, foolishly_, GD 2; 104.

ungewittignes f. _folly_, GD 163; 247.

ungewlitig _not bright, dull_, AS 31^10.

±ungewlitigian _to disfigure_, AS.

ungeworht _unwrought, unformed, unfinished_, Æ.

ungewriten _unwritten_, WW.

ungewuna I. m. _evil habit, vice_, CP 169^9. II. _unusual_, Æ:
_uninhabited_, Æ.

ungewunelic _unusual, strange_, Æ. [_Ger._ ungewöhnlich] adv. -lîce, Æ.

ungewuniendlic _uninhabitable_, #Lcd#.

ungewyder = ungewider  [[form of "ungewidere"?]]

ungewyld- = ungewild-

ungewylles = unwilles

ungewynelic = ungewunelic

ungewyrded _uninjured_, #Ph# 181.

ungewyrhtum (be) adv. phr. _without a cause_, #CVPs#.

ungier-wan, -ian (e, i, y) _to unclothe, divest of_.

ungifre _pernicious_, #Gen# 2470.

ungifu f. _evil gift_, W.

ungin _not great or broad_, #GnE# 206.

ungl = ungel

unglad = unglæd

unglæd (a) _cheerless, dull_, #Bo# 14^14.

unglædlic _implacable_, GPH 392.

unglædnes f. '_imperitia_,' WW 423^29. [mistake for unglêawnes?]

ungl¯æw == unglêaw

unglêaw _ignorant, foolish, unwise_, Æ. adv. -lîce, CP.

unglêawnes f. _want of discernment, folly, ignorance_, #Pa# 70.

unglêawscîpe m. _folly_, #Sc# 83^16.

unglenged = ungeglenged

ungnýðe _not niggardly, not sparing, liberal_. adv. -lîce, GD (ê).

ungôd I. adj. _not good_. II. n. _evil_.

ungor = hungor

ungrâpigende _not grasping_, ÆH 1·366^27.

ungrêne _not green, bare of grass_, #Gen# 117.

ungrîpendlic _irreprehensible_, #EPs# 18^8.

ungrund _vast_, #Ex# 508.

ungrynde _bottomless_, #Rim# 49.

ungyfeðe _unaccorded_, B 2921.

un-gyld, -gylde n. _excessive tax_. [gieldan]

ungylda m. _one who is not a member of a guild_, TC 606^16.

ungylde adv. _not entitled to compensation_, LL.

ungyltig _innocent_, AO 184^9.

ungýmen f. _carelessness_, BH.

ungýmende _careless_, BH 434^5 (ê).

ungyrdan = ongyrdan

ungyrian = ungierwan

unhâdian _to deprive of orders_, LL.

unhâdod = ungehâdod

unhâdung f. '_exordinatio_,' RBL 110^9.

unh¯æl = unhâl, unh¯ælu

+unh¯ælan _to weaken, debilitate_, #Sc# 51^10.

unh¯ælð f. _ill-health, weakness, infirmity, sickness_.

unh¯ælu f. _sickness, unsoundness_, AO: _mischief, evil_, B.

unh¯æmed _unmarried_, WW 530^19.

unh¯ær = unhâr

unhâl _sick, ill, weak_, CP.

unhâlgod _unhallowed, unconsecrated_.

unhâlian '_tabescere_,' #BPs# 118^139.

unhâlig (¯æ) _unholy, profane_, #ELPs# 42^1.

un-hâlwende (RHy), -hâlwendlic (Æ) _incurable deadly_.

unhandworht _not made with hands_, Mk 14^58.

unhâr (= an-) _hoary, grizzled_, B 357.

unhêah (ê) _not high, low_, Æ.

unhêanlîce _valiantly_, #Chr# 755.

unhearmgeorn _inoffensive_, Æ.

unhêarsumnes = unhîersumnes

un-hêg, -hêh = unhêah

unhelde (#Chr# 1095) = unhyldo

unhelian _to uncover, reveal_, Lk 12^2.

un-hêor-, -hêr- = unhîer-

unhered _unpraised, not celebrated_, #Bo# 68^24.

unherigendlic _not praiseworthy_, ÆH 2·406^17.

unhetol _peaceable_, NC 329.

unhîere (ê, êo, ý) I. _horrible, monstrous, fierce, wild, tempestuous_.
II. adv. _horribly_.

unhîerlic _wild, fierce, savage, gloomy_. adv. -lîce (GD 161^10).

unhîersum (y) _disobedient_. adv. -lîce.

unhîersumnes (ý) f. _disobedience_, CP.

unhîredwist f. _unfamiliarity_, #Sc# 203^13.

unhîwe _formless_, GPH 399^259.

unhîwed _colourless_, OEG.

unhlêowe _unfriendly, chill_, #Ex# 494.

unhlîdan (Æ) = onhlîdan

unhlîs (unhlîse?) _infamous, disreputable_, #KGl# 68^42.

unhlîsa m. _ill-fame, discredit, dishonour_, Æ.

unhlîsb¯ære _disreputable_, WW 354^17.

unhlîsêadig _infamous_, WW 420^15.

unhlîsful _infamous_, #Gl#.

unhlîsig _infamous_, #KGl# 56^5.

unhlitme (B 1129) = unflitme?

unhlûd _not loud_, GD 85^5.

unhlýs- = unhlîs-

unhnêaw ¶ _generous, liberal_.

unhoga _foolish_, MkL 7^18.

unhold _disloyal, unfriendly, hostile_, Æ. [_Ger._ unhold]

unholda m. _monster, devil_, #Cr# 762.

unhrædspr¯æce _slow of speech_, Æ (#Ex# 6^30).

unhrêoflig _not leprous_, ÆH 1·124^24.

unhrôr _not bent down, erect_, #Bo# 146^26.

unhûfed _bareheaded_, OEG 4466.

unhwearfiende _unchangeable, fixed_, #Bo# 20^29.

unhwîlen ¶ _eternal_.

unhýdig _ignorant, foolish_.

unhýhst = unhêhst superl. of unhêh.  [[under "unhêah"]]

unhyldo (e) f. _displeasure, disfavour, unfriendliness_, CP. [_Ger._
unhuld]

unhyr- = onhier-, onhyr-

unhýr- = unhîer-

unhýðig ¶ _unhappy_.

uni- = unge-

unîeð adv. (comp.) _with greater difficulty, more hardly_, CP. [êað]

unîeð- = unêað-

unin-seglian, -sæglian (Æ) _to unseal_.

unîðe = unîeðe  [[redirected to "unêathe"]]

uniucian = ungeocian

unlâb = unlâf

unlâcnigendlic _incurable_, #Lcd# 1·262^1.

unlâcnod _unhealed_, CP 61^4.

unl¯æc = unlêac

unl¯æce m. _bad physician_, #Lcd# 60b.

un-l¯æd, -l¯æde _poor, miserable, wretched, unhappy, unfortunate_:
_accursed, wicked_: _straying_? (_of cattle_).

unl¯ædlic _miserable_, NC 329. adv. -lîce.

unl¯ægne = unlîegne

unl¯æne _permanent_, W 264^18.

unl¯æred _unlearned, untaught, ignorant_, CP.

unl¯ærednes f. _want of learning_.

unlæt _unwearied, indefatigable_.

unlætto f. _sin_, GD 289. [unl¯æd]

unlâf f. _posthumous child_, WW.

unlagu f. _abuse of law, bad law, oppression, injustice_. æt unlagum
_unlawfully_.

unland m. _desert, waste_: _counterfeit, supposed land_, #Whale# 13.

unlandâgende m. _not owning land_, LL 112.

unlâr f. _bad teaching_.

unlêac pret. 3 sg. of onlûcan.  [[from first edition]]

unlêafful = ungelêafful

unleahtorwyrðe _not culpable_, #PPs# 18^7.

unlêanod _unpaid_, EC 148^4.

unlêas _not false, true_. adv. -lîce.

unlêcð = unlýcð pres. 3 sg. of unlûcan.

unlêfedlic = unlýfendlic  [[headword spelled "unlyfendlic"]]

unlêgne = unlîegne

unlêof ¶ _not dear, hated_.

unleoðuwâc (e^3) _inflexible, rigid, stubborn_.

unleoðuwâcnes f. _inflexibility_, WW.

unlesan = unlîesan

unlib- = unlyb-

unlic = ungelic  [[headword spelled "ungelîc"]]

unlîchamlic _incorporeal_, Æ, GD.

unlîcð (Æ) = unlýeð pres. 3 sg. of unlûcan.

unlîcwyrðe _displeasing_, ÆL 23b^374.

unlîefed = unâlîefed  [[under "unâlýfed"]]

unlîegne (¯æ, ê) _not to be questioned_, LL.

unlîesan (ê, ý) _to unloose_, Æ: _set free, put on a free footing_.

unlîf n. _death_, MFH 176.

unlîfes _dead_, ÆL 18·203.

unlifiende, unlifigende (y) _unliving, lifeless, dead_. [libban]

unlîtel = unlýtel

unlîðe _ungentle, harsh, severe_, Æ.

unliðowâc = unleoðuwâc

unlofod _unpraised_.

unlond = unland

unlûcan^2 _to unlock, open_, Æ.

unlust m. _evil desire, lust, sensuality_, Æ: _disinclination,
weariness_. [_Ger._ unlust]

+unlustian _to loathe_, #Bl# 59^8.

unlyb-ba m., -be f. _poisonous drug, poison_, Æ: _witchcraft_, Æ. [lybb]

unlybbende (MH 164^21) = unlifigende  [[under "unlifiende"]]

unlybwyrhta m. _worker with spells or poisons, wizard_, Æ.

unlýfednes = unâlîefednes  [[redirected to "unâlýfednes"]]

unlyfendlic _illicit, unlawful_, ZDA 31^8.

unlyfigende = unlifigende  [[under "unlifiende"]]

unlyft f. _bad air_, #Lcd# 6a.

unlygen _unlying, truthful_, LL 156[12].

unlýsan (Æ) = unlîesan

unlýt n. _a great deal_, #PPs# 61^9.

unlýtel _not small, much, great, very large_.

unm¯ædlîce = unm¯æðlîce

unm¯æg? m. _evil kinsman_? _alien_? #Wald# 2^23.

unm¯æge _not akin_, #PPs# 68^8.

unmægel = unmeagol

unmægnes f. _weariness_, WW 224^14.

unmægðlîce = unm¯æðlîce

unmæht- (N) = unmiht-

unm¯æle _unspotted, immaculate, pure, virgin_.

unm¯æne _not criminal, honest, innocent, truthful_: _free (from)_.

un-m¯ære, -m¯ærlic _inglorious_, #Bo#.

unm¯æte _excessive, immense, great, vast_, Æ: _countless, innumerable_.

unm¯ætlic _enormous_, A 4·152.

unm¯ætnes f. _vastness, excessive greatness_, BH.

unm¯æð f. _transgression, sin_, HL 13·234.

unm¯æðful _immoderate, excessive_, NC 329.

unm¯æðlic _excessive_, Æ. adv. -lîce _excessively_, Æ: _unmercifully,
cruelly_, Æ.

un-maga m., -magu f. _needy person, dependent, orphan_.

unmanig _not many, few_.

unmann m. _monster, wicked man_, Æ.

un-meagol, -meahl _insipid_, WW.

unmeaht = unmiht

unmedeme (Æ) = unmedome

unmedome (u^3) _incompetent, unfit, unworthy_, CP.

unmedomlîce adv. _negligently, carelessly_.

unmeht = unmiht

unmeltung f. _indigestion_, #Lcd# 95a.

unmendlinga = unmyndlinga

unmêne = unm¯æne

unmenged _unmixed_.

unmenn nap. of unmann.

unmenniselic _inhuman_, #Bo# 70^26.

unmet- = unm¯æt-

unmîdlod _unrestrained, unbridled_, CP.

unmidome = unmedome

unmiht (ie) I. f. _weakness_, CP. II. (æ) _impossible_, MtL.

+unmiht _without strength_, ÆL 25^771.

un-mihtelic, -mihtlic _impossible_.

unmihtig (æ, e) _weak, powerless_, Æ: _impossible_, NG.

unmihtignes f. _weakness_, #Lcd#.

unmilde _not meek, harsh_, BH 100^29.

unmildheort _merciless_, Æ.

unmilts f. _severity, anger_, Ct.

unmiltsigendlic _unworthy of compassion, unpardonable_, Æ. [milts]

unmiltsung f. _hardness of heart_, AO 64^16.

unmirigð = unmyrhð

unmôd n. _depression_, #Lcd# 65a.

unmôdig _humble_, CP: _timid_.

unmolsniendlic _uncorrupted_, OEG 60.

un-monig, -moneg = unmanig

unmurn _untroubled_, #PPs# 75^4.

unmurnlîce ¶ adv. _unpityingly, without sorrowing_.

unmycel _small_, GD 133^7.

unmyhtig = unmihtig

unmylts- = unmilds-

unmyndgian = unmynegian

unmynd-linga, -lenga, -lunga adv. _unawares, unexpectedly_, Æ, AO:
_undesignedly_.

unmynegian _to overlook, not to demand_, LL 382[43].

unmyrge _unpleasant_? _sad_? WW 211^16.

unmyrhð f. _sadness_, W 148^9.

unna m. = unne

±unnan pres. 1 sing. an(n), on(n), pl. unnon; pret. sg. ûðe, pp. ±unnen
swv. w. d. pers. and g. thing _to grant, allow, bestow, give_, #Bo,
Chr#; AO, CP, Æ. unnendre handa _voluntarily_: _be glad to see, wish,
desire_. ['_i-unne_']

unne f. _favour, approval, permission, consent_: _grant_: _liberality_.

unnêah adj. adv. _not near, far, away from_.

un-nêde, -nêdig = unnîedig

unnêdelîce (GD 346^9; JAW 55, 56) = ungnýðelîce  [[form of "ungnýðe"]]

unnêg, unnêh = unnêah

unnend m. _one who grants_, DR 5^5.

unnet = unnyt

unnîed-ig, -enga adv. _without compulsion or restraint, willingly_, CP.
[nêad]

unnit = unnyt II.

unnîðing m. _honest man (not an outlaw)_, #Chr# 1087; v. ANS 117·22.

un-nyt, -nytt I. adj. _useless, unprofitable_, Æ, CP. II. m.
_unprofitableness, emptiness, vanity, folly_.

unnytenes = unnytnes

unnytlic _useless, unprofitable, foolish_, CP. adv. -lîce.

unnytlicnes f. _uselessness_, #Lcd#.

unnytnes f. _unprofitableness, frivolity, emptiness_.

unnytwyrðe _unprofitable, useless_, Æ, CP. adv. -wurðlîce, Æ.

unofercumen _unsubdued_, #Gl#.

unoferfêre (oe^4) _impassable_, #Gl#.

unoferhrêfed _not roofed in_, #Bl# 125^21.

unoferswið-ed, -edlic, -ende, -endlic _unconquerable, invincible_.

unoferwin-nene, -nendlic _invincible_.

unoferwrigen _not covered_, ÆL 23b^209.

unoferwunnen _unconquered_, AO 156^28.

unoferwunnendlic = unoferwinnendlic  [[under "unoferwinnene"]]

unoflinnedlîce _unceasingly_, NC 329.

unofslegen _not killed_, ÆH 2·544^31.

unondcýðignes f. _ignorance_, #JVPs# 24^7.

unondgetful = unandgytful

unonlýsendlic _unpardonable_, GD 348^4.

unonstyred _unmoved_, GD 270^9n.

unonstyrigendlic _motionless_.

unonwend-endlic, -edlic _unchangeable, constant, immovable_. adv. -lîce.

unorne _old, worn out, decrepit_, #Ma# 256.

unornlic _old, worn_, Æ.

unplêolic _not dangerous, safe_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

unr¯æd m. _folly, foolish plan_: _crime, mischief, injury, plot_, Æ, AO.

unr¯æden f. _ill-considered act_, #Gen# 982.

unr¯ædfæst _unreliable, incompetent_, ÆP 212^15.

unr¯ædfæstlîce _unwisely, rashly_, Æ.

unr¯ædlic _thoughtless_, #Bl# 99^21. adv. -lîce, Æ.

unr¯ædsîð m. _foolish enterprise_, #Rd# 12^4.

unræfniendlic _intolerable_, #SPs# 123^4 (on-).

unreht == unriht

unrehth¯æmdere = unrihth¯æmere

unreordlic _insatiable_.

±unrêtan _to make sad_, AO. [rôt]

unrêtu f. _sadness_, A 4·165.

unrêðe _not cruel, gentle_, ÆH 2·44^25.

unrîce _poor_, LL, RB.

unriht (e, y) I. n. _wrong, sin, vice, wickedness, evil_, Æ: _injustice,
oppression_, Æ. II. adj. _wrong, unrighteous, wicked, false_:
_unlawful_.

unrihtcyst f. _vice_, LL (262^28).

unrihtd¯æd f. _evil doing_.

unrihtd¯æde _iniquitous_, #LPs# 9^24.

unrihtdêma m. _unjust judge_, W.

unrihtdôm m. _iniquity_, #Da# 183.

unrihtdônd m. _evildoer_, #Bl# 63^15.

unrihte adv. _unjustly, wrongly_.

unrihtfêoung f. _unrighteous hate_, #Met# 27^1.

unrihtful _unrighteous, wicked_, NC 329.

unrihtgestrêon n. _unrighteous gain_, #Bl# 63^8.

unrihtgestrod n. _ill-gotten, booty_, NC 330.

unrihtgewilnung (y) = unrihtwilnung
  [[headword spelled "unrihtwillnung"]]

unrihtgilp m. _vainglory_, LL (262^27).

unrihtgîtsung f. _wrongful greed_.

unrihth¯æman _to fornicate, commit adultery_.

unrihth¯æmdere (#VPs# 49^18) = unrihth¯æmere

unrihth¯æmed I. n. _fornication, adultery_. II. adj. _adulterous_.

unrihth¯æmedfremmere m. _adulterer_, NC 330.

unrihth¯æmend m. _adulterer_, #Bl# 63.

unrihth¯æmere m. _fornicator, adulterer_, Æ.

unrihth¯æmeð = unrihth¯æmed I.

unrihthêmere (#KGl#) = unrihth¯æmere

unrihtlic (e, y) _unjust, unrighteous, wrongful, wicked_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

unrihtlust m. _unlawful desire_, #Bo# 19^20.

unrihtlyblâc nm. _unlawful magic_, W 253^11.

unrihtnes (e^2) f. _wrong, unrighteousness, wickedness_, #Bl#.

unrihttîd f. _wrong time, improper occasion_, MFH 177.

unrihtweorc n. _secular work done on Sunday_, LL (130^25).

unrihtwîf n. _unlawful consort, mistress_, TC 373^29.

unrihtwîfung f. _unlawful wedlock_, BH 116^3.

unrihtwillend m. _evil-disposed person_, CP 89^22 (y^2).

unrihtwillnung f. _unlawful desire, lust, ambition_, CP.

unrihtwîs _unrighteous, wrong, unjust_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce.

unrihtwîsnes (e, y) f. _injustice, unrighteousness, iniquity_, Æ,
CP (y).

unrihtwrîgels n. _covering of error_, #Bl# 105^30.

unrihtwyrcend m. _evildoer_, #Bl#.

unrihtwyrhta m. _evildoer_, CP(y^2).

unrîm I. n. _countless number, huge host, large quantity, mass_. II. =
unrîme

unrîme _countless, innumerable_.

unrîmfolc n. _countless number (of people)_, CP 51^12.

unrîpe _immature, unripe_, #Gl#.

unrôt _sad, dejected_, Æ, CP: _displeased, angry_.

unrôtian _to become sad_: (±) _make sad_.

unrôtlic _sad, gloomy_. adv. -lîce.

unrôtmôd _sad-hearted_, #Bl# 113^12.

unrôtnes f. _sadness, contrition, disquietude_, Æ, CP.

±unrôtsian _to be or become sad, be grieved_, Æ: _make sad_.

unrûh _smooth, without seams_, JnLR 19^23.

unryht (AO, CP) == unriht

unrýne m. _diarrhæa_, #Lcd# 1·172^12.

unsac _not accused of anything, innocent_, #Lcd# 3·288^6.

unsadelod _not saddled_, LL.

unsæd _unsated, insatiable_, #PPs# 100^5.

uns¯æd n. _evil seed_, W 40^23.

unsæht = unseht

uns¯æl m. _unhappiness_, W 236^26.

uns¯ælan _to untie, unfasten_.

uns¯æle _wicked_, WW 421^23.

uns¯ælig _unfortunate, unhappy, wretched_: _mischievous, pernicious_,
#Gen# 637: _wicked_.

uns¯ælð f. _unhappiness, misfortune, adversity, misery_, CP.

unsæpig _sapless_, ÆH 1·102^4.

unsalt = unsealt

unsamwr¯æde _contrary, incongruous_, #Bo# 106^6.

unsâr _painless_, CP.

unsâwen _unsown_, LL 450[10].

unscæðed (e^2) _uninjured_.

unscæðful (e, ea) _innocent_. adv. -lîce, CP.

unscæðfulnes (ea, e) f. _innocence_, CP.

unscæðð-ednes, -ignes (e) f. _harmlessness, innocence_, Æ.

unscæðð-ende (e), -ig _innocent, harmless_.

unscamfæst _impudent, shameless_, #Gl#.

unscamfulnes f. _shamelessness, immodesty_, MkL 7^20 (eo).

unscamig _unashamed_, #Jul# 552.

unscamlic _shameless, immodest_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

unscað- = unscæð(ð)-

un-scêadelîce, -scêadlîce _unreasonably_.

unscêadwîslic _unreasonable_, ÆH 2·210^30.

unsceaft f. _monster_? #Rd# 88^32.

unsceam- = unscam-

unscearp _not sharp (of wine)_, #Lcd#.

unscearpnes f. _dulness_, BH 402^29.

unscearpsýne _not sharp-sighted_, #Lcd# 11b.

unsceað- = unscæð-

unscelleht (= ie) _not furnished with a shell_, #Lcd# 33b.

unscende (y) ¶ _not discreditable, blameless, glorious_.

un-scended, -scendende _uninjured, uncorrupted_.

unscennan _to unharness_, WW 91^13.

unscêod = unscôd pp. of unscôgan.

unscêogan = unscôgan

unsceom- (NG) = unscam-

unscêotan (WW 190^30) = onscêotan

unsceð- = unscæð-

unscildig (Æ) == unscyldig

unscirped _unclothed_, MtL 22^11.

unscôgan _to unshoe_, Æ, CP. pp. unscôd _unshod_.

unscom- = unscam-

unscoren _unshorn_.

unscortende _not failing_, LkLR 12^33.

unscrýdan (ê^2, î^2) _to put off (clothes)_, _undress, strip, deprive
of_, Æ. unscrýdd pp. _naked_. [scrûd]

unscyld f. _innocency_, #SPs# 40^13.

unscyldgung f. _innocence_, #ERPs# 17^25.

unscyldig (i) _guiltless, innocent_, Æ, CP: _not responsible_.

unscyldiglic _excusable_, #Bl# 189^32. adv. -lîce _innocently_, #Bk# 12.

unscyldignes f. _innocence_.

unscynde = unscende

unscýrdan = unscrýdan

unscyttan _to undo, unbolt_, ÆL 31^863.

unscyðende = unsceððende  [[under "unscæððende"]]

unseald _ungiven_, HL 10^495.

unsealt (a, y) _unsalted, insipid_.

unsêfernes = unsýfernes

unsefful '_insensatus_,' RHy 6^31. [sefa]

unseht I. mfn. _discord, disagreement, quarrel_. II. adj. _not agreed,
hostile_, #Chr#.

unsehtnes f. _discord, quarrel_, NC 330.

un-seldan, -seldon (Æ) _not seldom, repeatedly, frequently_.

unsêofene _not sighing_, MFH 177.

unsewenlic _invisible_, #Bo# 138^2.

unsibb f. _dissension, contention, war, strife_, AO.

unsibbian _to disagree_, WW.

unsibsumnes f. _anxiety_, JnL p6^1.

unsideful _immodest, unchaste_.

unsidefullnes f. _immodesty_.

unsidelice _immodestly_, NC 330.

unsidu m. _bad custom, vice, impurity_. [_Ger._ unsitte]

unsîf- = unsýf-

unsigefæst _not victorious_, ÆL 18^44.

unsingian = unsyngian

unsîð m. _unfortunate journey or expedition, misfortune, mishap_, Æ.

unsl¯æpig _sleepless_, WW 427^15.

unslâw (æ, ea) _not slow, active_. adv. -lîce, CP 381^1.

unsleac _not remiss, active, diligent_. adv. -lîce.

unsleacnes f. _diligence_.

unslêaw = unslâw

unslid? unslit (Cp 33#s#) n. _fat, grease, tallow_. [_Ger._ unschlitt;
or ?= unsylt]

unslitten _untorn_, JnL 19^23.

unslýped _open, unloosed_, W 83^9.

unsm¯æðe = unsmêðe

unsmeoruwig _not greasy_, #Lcd# 106b (smerig).

unsmêðe _not smooth, uneven, rough, scabby_.

unsmêðnes f. _roughness_, WW.

unsmôð = unsmêðe

unsnotor (e^3) _unwise_. adv. -lîce.

unsnotornes- (yter-) f. _folly_.

unsnott- = unsnot-

unsnyttru f. _folly, ignorance_.

unsnyttrum ¶ adv. _foolishly_.

unsoden not boiled or cooked.

unsôfte _harshly, bitterly, severely, violently_, Æ: _with difficulty,
hardly, scarcely_: _uncomfortably_.

unsôftlîce _harshly_, ÆH 1·434^7.

unsôm f. _disagreement_, LL.

unsorh _free from care_, #Bl# 217^29.

unsôð I. adj. _untrue, false_. II. n. _untruth, falsehood_.

unsôðfæst _untruthful_: _unjust, unrighteous_.

unsôðfæstnes f. _injustice, unrighteousness_.

±unsôðian _to falsify, disprove_.

unsôðsag-ol, -ul _untruthful_, Æ.

unspannan^7 _to unfasten_, WW 231^35.

unspecende = unsprecende

unspêd f. _want, poverty_.

unspêdig _poor_, Æ, AO: _not fertile_.

unspiwol _that stops vomiting_? #Lcd#.

unspornend = onspornend

unsprecende _not able to speak_, Æ.

unstæfwîs _illiterate_, GPH 393.

unstæððig _unstable, irregular, weak, frivolous, wanton_, Æ.

unstæððignes f. _instability, inconstancy, wantonness_, Æ.

unstaðolfæst _unstable, unenduring, weak, fickle_, Æ.

unstaðolfæstnes f. _instability, weakness, fickleness_, Æ.

unstenc m. _stench, stink_.

unstille _moving, changeable, restless, inquiet, uneasy_, CP.

+unstillian _to disturb, agitate_, BH 278^10.

un-stilnes, -stillnes f. _agitation, restlessness, disturbance,
disquiet, trouble, disorder, tumult_, Æ, AO.

unstrang _not strong, weak, infirm, feeble_, Æ.

unstrangian _to be feeble_.

unstrangnes f. _feebleness_.

unstrenge _weak_, ÆH 2·390^26.

unstydful _inconstant, apostate_, DR 121^10. [= unstede-]

unstydfullnes (on-) f. _instability_, DR.

unstyrendlic _immovable, hard to carry_, MtL 23^4.

unstyriende _immovable, stationary_, #Bo#.

unsw¯æs _unpleasant, disagreeable, uncongenial_. adv. -sw¯æse.

unsw¯æslic _ungentle, cruel_, #Jud# 65. [sw¯æs]

unswefn n. _bad dream_, #Lcd# 3·288^21.

unsweotol _imperceptible, indistinct_.

unswête _not sweet_: _foul_.

unswicen _unbetrayed, unharmed, safe_, #Chr# 1048.

un-swicende, -swiciende _true, faithful_.

unswicol _trustworthy, true_.

unswîð _not strong_, #Lcd#. adv. -swîðe.

unsydeful = unsideful

unsýferlic _impure_, #Bl# 43^17.

unsýfernes f. _impurity, foulness_.

unsýfre (î) I. adj. _impure, unclean, filthy_. II. adv. _filthily_, #Cr#
1484?

unsylt = unsealt

unsyngian _to exculpate_, LL 98[21,1].

unsynnig _guiltless, innocent_, Æ.

unsynnum adv. _guiltlessly_, B 1072.

unt¯æle _blameless, faultless_, Æ.

unt¯æled _unblamed_, CP 351^20.

unt¯ællic (â) _blameless, immaculate, undefiled, praiseworthy_. adv.
-lîce, Æ, CP.

unt¯æl-wierðe (y^3) _blameless_, CP. adv. -wierðlîce.

untæslic = unðæslic

untâl- = unt¯æl-

untala (NG) = untela

untamcul _untameable_, GPH 397.

unteala = untela

unteald _uncounted_, #Lcd# 3·264^11.

untealt _stable, steady_, #Chr# 897#d#.

untela adv. _not well, amiss, badly, ill, improperly, wrongly_, CP.

untellendlic _indescribable_.

untemed _untamed_, #CPs#, WW.

untêmende = untýmende

untênan (#KGl#) = ontýnan

untêogoðad _untithed_, CP 439^29.

unteola = untela

untêorig _untiring, unceasing_, #Met# 28^17.

untîd¯æt _untimely eating_, NC 330.

untîdfyl f. _untimely eating or drinking_, W 46^14.

untîdgewidere n. _unseasonable weather_, #Chr# 1095.

untîdlic _unseasonable_, AO. adv. -lîce.

untîdsp¯æc f. _untimely speech_, LL (322^9).

untîdweorc n. _work at an improper time (e.g. on Sunday)_, W.

untîena (AO) = ontêona

untîgan _to untie, loosen, unchain_, Æ. [têag]

untilad _destitute_, #Bo# 16^12.

untîma m. _unseasonableness, wrong time_, CP: _bad time, misfortune_, W
297^7.

untîme _ill-timed, unfortunate_, Æ.

untîmnes f. _evil times_, W 207^18.

untînan = ontýnan

untôbrocen _unbroken_, Æ.

untôclofen _uncloven_, ÆL 25^45.

untôd¯æled _undivided, individual, indivisible, inseparable_.

untôd¯æledlic _inseparable, indivisible_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

untôd¯ælednes f. _undividedness_, A 8·318^17.

untô-d¯ælend-, d¯æl-, dâl-, -dêlen- = untô-d¯æled-

untôl¯ætendlîce _incessantly_, GD 117^23.

untô-lêsende, -lýsende _that cannot be loosed, inextricable_, WW.

untôlýsendlic _unforgivable_, GD 342^26.

untôsceacen _unshaken_.

untôslegen _unshattered_, AS 22^8.

untôsliten _untorn, uninjured_, CP.

untôsprecendlic _ineffable_, TC.

untôtw¯æmed _undivided_, Æ.

untôworpenlic (e^2, a^4) _inviolable_, OEG 11^153.

untrâglîce _frankly_, #El# 410.

untrêow = untrêowð

untrêowe (ý) _untrue, unfaithful_.

untrêowf¯æst (ý) _unfaithful, unreliable_.

untrêowlîce _faithlessly_, AO.

untrêowsian _to defraud, deceive_, CP: _offend_, G.

untrêowð f. _unfaithfulness, treachery_, AO.

untrum _infirm, weakly, sick, ill_, Æ, CP.

untrumian _to be or become sick or infirm_: _make weak_, Æ.

untrumlic _infirm, weak_, Æ.

untrumnes f. _weakness, sickliness, infirmity, illness_, Æ, AO, CP.

untrymed _unconfirmed (by a bishop)_, LL (140^19).

un-trymig, -trymmig _sick, infirm_, NG.

untrymigan _to become weak_, JnL 6^2.

untrymmigo f. _illness_, MtL 10^1.

untrymnes = untrumnes

untrymð f. _weakness, illness_.

untrýw- = untrêow-

untwêgendlîce = untwêogendlîce

untwêo m. _certainty_, #Cr# 961.

untwêod _undoubting_, #An# 1244.

untweofeald = untwiefeald

untwêogende _unhesitating, not doubting_, CP.

untwêogendlic _indubitable, certain_. adv. -lîce _indubitably,
unhesitatingly, undoubtingly_, AO, CP.

untwêolic (î) _undoubted_, OEG. adv. -lîce _certainly, with
certainty_, Æ.

untwêonde = untwêogende

untwêon(d)lîce = untwêogendlîce

untwêonigend (ý) _undoubting_, A 9·115^45.

untwî- = untwêo-

untwý- = untwie-

  [[Printed on one line:
  untwî-, untwý- = untwêo-, untwie-]]

untwie-feald, -feld _not double_, CP: _not double-minded, without
duplicity, sincere_, CP.

untýd _unskilful, inexperienced_, CP.

untyddre = untýdre

untýdlic = untîdlic

untýdre I. _firm, unbending_, #An# 1254. II. m. monster, B 111.

untýdrende _barren_, #Lcd# 33b.

untýgian = untîgan

untygða _unsuccessful (in getting one's wish)_, CP 257^18.

untýmende _barren, unfruitful_, Æ. [tîeman]

untýnan = ontýnan

untýned _unfenced_, LL 106[40].

untýð = untygð  [[form of "untygða"?]]

unðærfe in phr. 'unðærfe ðing' '_nequaquam_' MtL 2^6. [unðearf]

unðæslic _inappropriate, unseemly, unbecoming, absurd_, Æ. adv.
-lîce, Æ.

unðæslicnes f. _impropriety_, ÆH 2·316^8.

unðæslicu f. _incongruity_, RB 124^13.

unðanc m. _ingratitude, disinclination, displeasure_, Æ, AO, CP: _evil
intention, an ill turn_, Æ. his unðances _against his will,
involuntarily_. [_Ger._ undank]

unðancful _unthankful_, CP, GD.

unðanc-ol, -ul _ungrateful_, NC 330.

unðanc-wurðe, -wyrðe _ungrateful_: _not acceptable, disagreeable_, Æ.

unðancwyrðlîce _ungratefully_, NC 330.

unðearf f. _damage, hurt, detriment, ruin_, Æ.

unðearfes _without a cause_, #PPs# 13^6.

unðêaw m. _vice, sin, fault_, Æ, CP.

unðêawfæst _disorderly, ill-mannered, dissolute_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

unðêawful _uncontrolled, disorderly_, WW.

unðegenlîce _basely_.

unðinged _unexpected, sudden_, CP.

unðingod _unatoned for_, CP 423^35.

unðolemôdnes f. _impatience_.

unðoligendlic _intolerable_, #Sc# 208^14.

unðorfæst _unprofitable_, DR 179^17.

un-ðrîste, -ðrîeste _diffident_, CP.

unðrôwendlicnes f. _impassibility_, ZDA 31·14.

unðrôwigendlic _unsuffering_, Æ.

unðurhsceotendlic _impenetrable_.

unðurhtogen _unperformed, neglected_, CP 329^14.

unðwægen = unðwogen

unðw¯ære = ungeðw¯ære

+unðw¯ærian _to disagree_, Æ, CP.

unðw¯ærnes f. (ê) _discord, division_, #Chr#.

un-ðwean, -ðwagen, -ðwægen, -ðwegen, -ðwên = unðwogen

unðwêrnes = unðw¯ærnes

unðwogen _unwashed_.

unðyhtig _weak_, OET 107.

unðyldig = ungeðyldig

unðyldlicnes f. _difficulty_, BH 2·340.

unundergilde (a^2) _invaluable_, #Bo# 27^20.

unwâclic ¶ _steadfast, strong, noble, splendid_, adv. -lîce.

unw¯æded (ê) _not clothed_, MtL 22^11.

unwæder = unweder

unwælgrim _gentle, merciful_, GD 133^6.

unwæm- = unwem-

unwær (-war- in obl. cases) _incautious, careless, unthinking, foolish_,
Æ, CP: _unaware, unexpected_. on un-wær, -waran, -warum _unawares,
unexpectedly_.

unwæres = unwares

unwærlic _unwary, heedless_, CP. adv. -lîce, Æ, AO, CP.

unwærnes f. _heedlessness_, W 299^7.

unwærscipe m. _folly_, ÆL 1·68^4.

unwæscen _unwashen_, #Lcd# 41b.

unwæstm mfn. _barrenness_: _tare, weed_.

unwæstmb¯ære _unfruitful, barren, sterile_, Æ, CP.

unwæstm-b¯ærnes (Æ, AO), -berendnes (Æ) f. _unfruitfulness, barrenness,
sterility_.

umwæstmberend-e, -lic _sterile_.

unwæstmfæst _barren_, #Bl# 163^17.

unwæstmfæstnes f. _barrenness_, #Bl# 163^17.

unwæterig _waterless, dry, desert_.

unwandiende _unhesitating_, CP 381^25.

unwar- v. unwær.

unwares adv. _unawares_. [gs. of unwær]

unwarnod _unwarned_, LL 382^33.

unwealt _steady, stable_, #Chr# 897.

unwearnum ¶ adv. _irresistibly_: _suddenly, in a moment_.

unwearð = unweorð

unweaxen ¶ _not grown up, young_.

unwêded = unw¯æded

unweder n. _bad weather, storm_, Æ.

unwederlîce adv. _tempestuously_, Mt 16^3.

unweg = onweg

unwegen _not weighed_, #Lcd# 1·376^7.

unwemlic _unsullied, pure_, WW 522^35.

un-wemme, -wemmed _unblemished, unstained, unspotted, uninjured_, Æ:
_inviolate_.

unwemmend m. _innocent man_, #REPs# 36^18 (on-).

unwemming f. _incorruptibility, incorruption_, #Sc# 41^10.

unwemnes f. _purity_, HL 18^422.

+unwendnes = onwendnes  [[under "onwendednes"]]

unwêne _unexpected_: _hopeless_, Æ.

umwêned _unexpected_.

unwênlic adj. _unpromising, hopeless, desperate_, AO, CP. adv. -lîce
_unexpectedly, by chance_, GD 88^17.

unwênunga _unexpectedly_, #Bo# 140^10.

unwêod n. _ill weed_, W 92^19.

unweoder = unweder

unweorcheard _delicate, weakly, infirm_, RB 75^8.

unweorclic (o) _unsuitable for work_, A 8·319^30.

unweorð (AO) = unwierðe

unweorðian (o, u) _to slight, treat with contempt, dishonour_, CP: (±)
_become worthless, vile, dishonour oneself_.

unweorðlic (u) _unworthy, dishonourable_, AO: _unimportant, humble_, CP.
adv. -lîce _unworthily, dishonourably, ignominiously_, AO, CP:
_indignantly_.

unweorðnes f. _slight, contempt, disgrace_, AO, CP.

unweorðscipe m. _dishonour, disgrace_: _indignation_, CP 222^9.

unweorðung (u) f. _disgrace_: _indignation_, CP 222^12.

unweotod = unwitod

unwer (#KGl#) = unwær

unwered _unprotected_, #Gen# 812.

unwêrig _unwearying, indefatigable, persistent_, Æ, AO.

unwerlîce = unwærlîce

unwerod _not sweet_, CP 447^19.

unwestm = unwæstm

unweðer = unweder

unwîd _not wide_, NC 330.

unwidere n. _bad weather_, W.

unwîdlod _unpolluted_, DR 90^17.

unwierðe I. adj. _unworthy_, CP: _worthless_: _contemptible,
ignominious_. II. adv.

unwîese = unwîse, unwîslîce

unwilla m. _repugnance, displeasure_.

unwillan = unwillum

unwillende _unwilling, involuntary_, CP.

unwilles adv. _unwillingly, involuntarily, reluctantly_, Æ.

unwillum adv. _unwillingly, reluctantly_. his unwillum _against his
will_, AO: _involuntarily, unintentionally_.

unwilsumlîce adv. _involuntarily, against one's will_, BH 442^23.

unwindan^3 (= on-) _to unwind, uncover_, Æ.

unwine m. _foe, enemy_.

unwinsum = unwynsum

unwîs _unwise, foolish, ignorant, uninformed_, CP.

unwîsdôm m. _unwisdom, imprudence, folly, ignorance_, CP.

unwîse = unwîslîce

unwîslic _foolish_. adv. -lîce, Æ.

unwîsnes f. _ignorance_: _wickedness_, DR.

unwita m. _witless person, ignoramus_.

unwitende _unwitting, ignorant_, AO.

unwîtnigendlîce _without punishment, with impunity_, #ÆGr# 233^6.

unwîtnod _unpunished_, CP.

unwîtnung f. _impunity_, #Sc# 235^5.

unwitod (io, u) _uncertain_.

unwittig _unconscious, ignorant, stupid_, Æ.

unwittignes f. _folly_, GD 163^34.

unwittol _ignorant_, #Sc# 80^12.

unwitweorc n. _foolish work_, #Bl# 111^2.

unwiðerweard _friendly_, CP 361^20.

unwiðerweardlic _not discordant_, NC 330.

unwiðmetenes f. _incomparability_, OEG 587.

unwiðmetenlic _not comparable, incomparable_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

unwlite m. _dishonour_, WW.

unwliteg = unwlitig

unwlitegian _to become disfigured_, CP: _disfigure, transform_, CP.

unwlitegung f. _disfigurement_, WW 391^5.

unwlitig _unsightly, deformed, disfigured, ill-favoured_, Æ.

unwlitignes f. _disfigurement_, BH 384^4.

unworclic = unweorclic

unworht _unwrought, unfinished_.

unworðian = unweorðian

unwrænc = unwrenc

unwr¯æne _not lustful_, #Lcd#.

un-wr¯æst, -wr¯æste (ê) _feeble, weakly_, AO: _unsteady, untrustworthy_.

unwr¯æstlîce adv. _weakly, incongruously_, A 8·334^18.

unwrecen _unpunished, unavenged_.

unwrenc (æ) m. _vice, evil design_, Æ, CP.

unwrêon^1,2 _to uncover, reveal_.

unwrêst = unwr¯æst

un-wrigednes, -wrigennes f. _uncovering, revelation_.

unwrigen _open, unconcealed_, MFH 101^7 (pp. of unwrêon).

unwriten _unwritten_, #Bo#.

unwrîtere m. _incorrect copyist_, #ÆGr# 3^24.

unwrîðan _to untwist, unbind_, CP.

unwunden I. _not wound_. II. pp. of unwindan.

unwundod _not wounded_, #Gen# 183.

unwuniendlic _uninhabitable_, #Lcd# 3·262.

unwurð == unweorð

unwuted = unwitod

unwynsum _unpleasant_, Æ.

unwynsumnes f. _unpleasantness_, Æ.

unwyrcan _to undo, destroy_.

unwyrd f. _misfortune, trouble_.

unwyrtrumian _to root out_, MtL 13^29.

unwyrð- = unweorð-

unwyrðe = unwierðe

unymb-fangen, -fangenlic _incomprehensible_, GD.

unymbwendedlic _unalterable_, DR 164^16.

unymbwriten _indescribable_, GD 268^24.

unýð- = unêað-

unýðgian _to trouble_, #EPs# 34^15.

ûp [S 122] adv. _'up' (to a place), up stream, up country (inland)_:
_upwards_. l¯ætan ûp _to put ashore_. ûp forl¯ætan _divide_.

ûpâberan^1 _to bear up_.

ûpâblâwan^7 _to blow up, be in eruption (of a volcano)_, ÆL 8^222.

ûpâbrecan^4 _to break out, break through, boil up_, Æ.

ûp-âbregdan, -âbrêdan^3 _to lift up, raise up, exalt_, CP.

ûpâdelfan^3 _to dig up_.

ûpâdôn anv. _to take up, exhume_.

ûpâfangnes f. _reception, assumption_, A 5·464.

ûpâhæf- = ûpâhaf-

ûpâhafenlîce (æ) adv. _arrogantly_, OEG 667.

ûpâhafennes f. _exultation, presumption, arrogance, pride_, CP:
_elevation_, Æ.

ûpâhafu _lifting up_, NC 331.

ûpâhebban^6 _to lift up, raise up, exalt_, Æ, CP: _rise in the air,
fly_.

ûpâhefedlîce _arrogantly_, #HGl# 422^8.

ûp-âhefednes (Æ), -âhefennes = ûpâhefennes
  [[headword spelled "ûpâhafennes"]]

ûpâhôn^7 _to hang up_, Æ.

ûpâmýlan? _to come to light, appear_, #HGl# 463 (v. OEG 4784).

ûpâr¯æran _to raise up, lift up, exalt_, AO, CP: _excite_.

ûpâreccan _to erect, raise, build_, #VPs#.

ûpârîsan^1 _to rise up_, CP.

ûpârisnes f. _resurrection_, EHy 14^6.

ûpâspringan^3 _to spring up, arise_.

ûpâ-springnes, -sprungnes f. _uprising_, #LPs# 102^12.

ûpâstandan^6 _to stand up, rise up, emerge_.

ûpâstîgan^1 _to rise, ascend_, Æ, CP.

ûp-âstîgenes, -âstîgnes f. _ascent, ascension, means of going up_.

ûpâstreccan _to uplift_, CM 38.

ûpâtêon^2,1 _to draw up, bring up, rear_: _draw out, pull out, pluck
up_: _lift up, place in an upright position_, Æ.

ûpâðenian _to elevate, lift up_, CP.

ûp-âweallan, -âwallan^7 _to well up, steam up, boil up_, Æ.

ûpâwegan^5 _to lift up, support_, Æ.

ûpâwendan _to turn upwards, raise_, Æ. pp. ûpâwend _supine_, #ÆGr#.

ûpberan^4 _to bear up_.

ûpbesêon^5 _to look up_.

ûpbrêdan^3 _to reproach with, upbraid_, W 248^9.

ûpcuman^4 _to come up, arise_.

ûpcund _from above, heavenly_, CP.

ûpcyme m. _rising, origin, source_.

ûpeard m. _land above, heaven_, #Gu# 1051.

ûpende m. _upper end_.

ûpengel ¶ m. _heavenly angel_.

ûpêode pret. 3 sg. of ûpgân.

ûpfæreld n? _ascension_, ÆH 1·444^1.

ûpfeax _bald in front_, WW 276^32.

ûpfêgan _to erect_, CP.

ûpfêran _to go forth, spring forth_, GPH 401.

ûpferian _to carry up, to raise_, #Sc# 130^7.

ûp-flêogan (Æ), -flêon^2 _to fly up_.

ûpflêring f. _upper floor (of house)_, Æ.

ûpflôr fm., ûpflôre f. _upper chamber or story, garret_, Æ.

ûpflugon pret. pl. of ûpflêogan.

ûpgân anv. _to go up_: _make to go up, raise_: _rise (of sun)_, #Guth#
148^41.

ûpgang m. _rising, sunrise_, Æ: _going up, approach, ascent_: _landing,
going inland_.

ûpganga m. _landing_, #Ma# 87.

ûpgeberan^4 _to bear or carry up_.

ûpgebrêdan (W 249^3) = ûpbrêdan

ûpgemynd § n. _contemplation of things above_.

ûpgêotan^2 _to well up_, #Guth# 131^199.

ûpgetêon^2,1 _to draw up_.

ûpgodu np. _the gods above, heathen gods_, WW 497^25.

ûpgong = ûpgang

ûphafenes = ûpâhafennes

ûphêafod n. _upper end_, KC 6·79^10.

ûphêah _uplifted, high, elevated_: _sublime, noble, upright_.

ûpheald n. _maintenance_, KC 4·232^5.

ûphebbe f. _water-hen, coot_, #PPs# 10 3^17.

ûphebbing f. _uprising_, LkL 8^8.

ûp-hefenes (#VPs#), -hefnes = ûpâhafennes

ûpheofon m. _heaven above, sky_.

ûphladan^6 _to draw up_, #HGl# 418.

ûphûs n. _upper room_, WW 384^3.

ûpland n. _country (as opposed to town)_.

ûplang _upright, erect_: _tall_.

ûplegen f. _hair-pin_, WW 223^16.

ûplendisc _from the uplands, rural, from beyond the town_, Æ. [ûpland]

ûplic _upper, supreme, lofty, sublime, heavenly, celestial_, Æ, CP.

ûplyft fnm. _upper air, ether, sky_.

ûpnes f. _height_, #LPs# 10 3^3.

ûpniman^4 _to raise up_, EHy 3^8.

upon = uppan

upp = ûp

uppan (o^2) prep. (w. d. and a.) _on, upon, up to, against_: (time) _on,
after_: _in addition to_. wið u. _above_. on u. _against_.

+uppan = +yppan

uppe I. adv. _above, aloft, up, inland_, CP. u. on _upon_. II. = yppe

uppe- = ûp-

uppian _to rise up, swell_, CP 277^7.

uppl- = ûpl-

uppon = uppan

ûprador = ûprodor  [[under "ûproder"]]

ûpr¯æcan _to reach up_, #Bl# 223^10.

ûpriht _upright, erect_, Æ: _face upwards_, OEG 2157. adv. -rihte.

ûprine = ûpryne

ûprocettan _to belch up_, #EPs# 118^171.

ûp-roder, -rodor ¶ m. _upper heavens, ether, firmament_.

ûpryne m. _ascent, rising (of sun)_.

ûpsittan^5 '_residere_,' #ÆGr#.

ûpspring m. _rising up, origin, birth_, Æ: _what springs up_.

ûpsprungennes f. _eclipse_, BH 240^20#b#.

upstîge m. _ascent, ascension_, Æ: _staircase_, GD 170^24.

ûpstîgend m. _one who mounts up, rider_, DR; CHy 4^1.

ûpðyddan _to swell up_, #Guth# 131^197.

ûpwæg = ûpweg

ûpwæstm m. _stature_, A 17·113.

ûpware mp. _inhabitants of heaven_, WW 355^29.

ûpweallan^7 _to boil up_, AO.

ûpweard, ûpweardes adv. _up, upwards_: _towards heaven_.

ûpweg ¶ m. _ascent, ascension_.

ûpyrnan^3 (eo) _to run up, grow, increase_: _rise_.

ûpyrne = ûpryne

ûr m. _bison, aurochs_: _name of the rune for =u=_. [_Ger._ auer]

ûre I. possess. pron. _'our,' ours_, _AO, CP, G_. II. gp. of ic.

ûrelendisc _of our country_, #ÆGr# 93^17.

ûrigfeðere ¶ _dewy-winged_.

ûriglâst _leaving a damp track_, #Wy# 29.

ûrne asm. of ûre I.

urnen pp., urnon pret. pl. of iernan.

ûron = ûrum dsmn. and dp. of ûre I.

ûs dap. of pers. pron. ic _us_.

ûser I. poss. pron. gen. ûsses _our_. II. gp. of ic.

ûsic, ûsig, ûsih = ûs

ûsse = ûre

ûsser = ûser

ûsses v. ûser.

ûssic = ûsic, ûs

ûsspîung f. _expectoration_, WW 113^9. [ût, spîwung]
  [[headword spelled "spiwung"]]

ûssum dsn. of ûser.

ût adv. '_out_,' _AO, Bo, G_: _without, outside_.

ûta- (N) = ûtan-

ûtâberstan^3 _to burst out, burst forth_, CP.

ûtâblâwan^7 _to blow out, breathe out_.

ûtâbrecan^4 _to break out_, Æ.

ûtâbrêdan^3 _to pluck out, take out or away_.

ûtâcnyssan _to drive out_, #ERPs# 35^13.

ûtacumen = ûtancumen

ûtacund _extraneous, external, foreign_, NG.

ûtacunda m. _stranger_, LkL 17^18.

ûtacymen = ûtancymen  [[under "ûtancumen"]]

ûtâdelfan^3 _to dig out_, #ÆGr#.

ûtâdôn anv. _to do out, put out_, Æ.

ûtâdr¯æfan _to drive out, expel, destroy_, Æ.

ûtâdrîfan^1 _to drive out, disperse, dispel_, LL.

ûtâdrýgan _to dry out_.

ût¯æðmian (ê) _to breathe out_, MFH 122^8.

ûtâfaran^6 _to come forth, go out, depart_, CP.

ûtâflêon^2 _to flee away_.

ûtâflôwan = ûtflôwan

ûtâflýman _to drive out or away_.

ûtâfôn^7 _to take out, except_.

ût-âgân anv., -âgangan^7 _to go out, go forth_.

ûtâgêotan^2 _to pour out, dispense_.

ûtâhr¯æcan _to spit out_.

ûtâlædan _to lead out_, LL, #VPs#.

ûtâm¯ær-an, -ian _to drive out, expel, depopulate_, BH.

utan = wuton

ûtan adv. _from outside_, _An_; #Chr#: _on the outside, without_, _Bo,
Gen_. ûtan landes _abroad_, _PPs_ 64^8. ['_outen_']

ûtanbordes adv. _from abroad_, CP 3^11.

ûtan-cumen, -cymen I. _foreign, strange_, _AO_; Æ: _belonging to
another_. ['_outcome_'] II. m. _stranger, foreigner_.

ûtane adv. _from without, outwards, outside, externally_, AO, CP.

ûtanlandes v. ûtan.

ûtanweard _external, outside_, _WW_. ['_outward_']

ûtânýdan _to drive out, expel_, #RPs# 43^3.

ûtâscêofan = ûtâscûfan

ûtâsceotan^2 _to sprout forth, burst forth_, CP: _to pierce out_, AO.

ûtâscûfan^2 _to drive out, thrust out, shut out_.

ûtâscyndan _to drive out_, Æ.

ûtâslêan^6 _to strike outwards, break out_, CP.

ûtâslîdan^1 _to slip out_.

ûtâspîwan^4 _to spew forth, vomit up_, CP 447^17,19.

ûtâstingan^3 _to put out (eyes)_.

ûtâtêon^2,1 _to draw out_, Æ.

ûtâtýnan _to exclude_, #VPs#.

ûtâðringan^3 _to press out_.

ûtâðýdan _to thrust out, cast out_, Æ.

ûtaweard (NG) = ûtanweard

ûtâweorpan^3 _to cast out, empty out_.

ûtberstan = ûtâberstan

ûtcumen = ûtancumen

ûtcwealm (a, æ) m. _utter destruction, extirpation_, Cp 461#i#.

ûtcýðan _to promulgate, announce_, A 4·166.

ûtdr¯æf f. _decree of expulsion_, ÆH 21^85.

ûtdr¯æfan _to drive out, expel_.

ûtdr¯æfere m. _driver out_, WW 172^46.

ûtdragan^6 to remove, LL 454[9].

ûtdrîfan^1 _to drive out or away, expel, scatter, disperse_.

ûte adv. _without, outside, abroad_, _BH_; Æ: _out_. ['_oute_']

ûtemest = ýtemest

ûten = ûtan

ûtene = ûtane

ûter == ûtor

ûtera, ûterra adj. (comp.) _outer, exterior, external_, AO, CP. superl.
ýtemest _uttermost, utmost, extreme, last_.

ûtermere m. _outer sea, open sea_, #Chr# 897#a#.

ûteweard adj. _external, outward, outside, extreme, last_. as sb.
_outward part, exterior_. on ûteweardan _on the outside, outwardly_.

ûtfær n. _going out_, Æ.

ûtfæreld n. _exodus, going out_, Æ, AO.

ûtfaran^6 _to go out_.

ûtfaru f. _going out_, _Æ, RB_. ['_outfare_']

ûtfêran _to go out_, Æ.

ûtflêon^2 _to flee out or away_.

ûtflôwan^7 _to flow out_, Æ, CP: _scatter, be dispersed_, EHy 5^6.

ûtflýman = ûtâflýman

ûtfôr f. _evacuation (from body)_, #Lcd# 6a.

ûtforl¯ætan _to cast out_, Æ, AO, CP.

ûtfûs _ready to start_, B 33.

ûtgân anv. _to go out_, CP.

ûtgang m. _going out, departure, exit, exodus_: _latter part_, _Guth,
MtL, VPs_: _privy_: _dejecta, excrement_, #Lcd#: '_anus_.' ['_outgang_']

ûtgangan^7 = ûtgân

ûtgârsecg m. _remotest sea_, #Creat# 70.

ûtgefeoht n. _external war_, BH I, #XXII#.

ûtgegân = ûtgân

ûtgel¯ædan = ûtl¯ædan

ûtgem¯ære n. _extreme or remotest limit_.

ûtgenga m. _exit_, MtR 22^9.

ûtgêð (#KGl#) pres. 3 sg. of ûtgân.

ûtgong = ûtgang

ûthealf f. _outer side_, WW 153^45.

ûthere m. _foreign army_, #Chr#.

ûthlêap n. _fine for letting a prisoner escape_, TC.

ûtian _to put out, expel_, _LL_: _alienate (property)_. ['_out_']

ûtirning (io) f. _flux_, MkL 5^25.

ûtlâd f. _right of passage outwards by water_, EC 344: _bringing
together (of material)_? AS 2^7.

ûtl¯ædan _to lead out, bring out_, LL 54[8,1].

ûtl¯ædnes (ê) f. '_abductio_,' EHy 6^36.

ûtlænda = ûtlenda

ûtlændisc = ûtlendisc

ûtl¯æs f. _out-pastures_, KC 6·214.

ûtlaga m. '_outlaw_,' _Æ, W_.

±ûtlagian _to 'outlaw,' banish_, _Chr_.

ûtlagu? f. _outlawry_. [_ON._ útlagi]

ûtlah _outlawed_, #Chr#, LL.

ûtland n. _foreign land_, #PPs#: _outlying land (granted to tenants)_,
_TC_ 502. ['_outland_']

ûtlec = ûtlic

ûtlednes = ûtlædnes  [[headword spelled "ûtl¯ædnes"]]

ûtlenda m. _foreigner, stranger, alien_, #Gl#.

ûtlende = ûtlendisc

ûtlendisc (æ) I. _strange, foreign_, _Æ, Chr_. II. m. _foreigner,
stranger_. ['_outlandish_']

ûtlêoran _to go out, pass_, GD.

ûtlic _from without, foreign_, BH.

ûtm¯æran _to tell out, make known, proclaim, announce_, A 4·166.

ût-mæst, -mest = ýtemest

ûtniman^4 _to take out, redeem_.

uton = wuton

ûton = ûtan

ûtone = ûtane

ûtor (comp. of ûte) adv. _beyond_.

ûtorlic (e^2) _external_, #Kl# 14^77.

ûtr¯æcan _to reach out_.

ûtr¯æsan _to rush out_, #Chr#.

ûtre = ûterre f. and n. of ûterra.  [[under "ûtera"]]

ûtrîdan^1 _to ride or go away_, LL 210[8].

ûtrine = ûtryne

ût-roccettan, -roccian _to belch out_, #EJPs#.

ûtryne m. _running away, issue, exit, outlet_: _what runs out_.

ûtsang = ûhtsang

ûtscêotan^2 _to abut on_, EC 121: _suffer to escape, aid the escape of_,
LL 194[6,1].

ûtscûfan^2 _to push out, shut out, exclude_, Æ.

ûtscyte m. _outfall, outlet, exit_, Æ.

ûtscytling m. _stranger, foreigner_, #Sc# 200^4.

ûtsendan _to send out_.

ût-siht, -sihte f. _flux, diarrh[oe]a_, Æ, AO.

ûtsihtâdl f. _diarrh[oe]a, dysentery_, #Lcd#.

ûtsîon^1 _to issue out_, AO 38^7.

ûtsîð m. _going out, departure_: _death_.

ûtspîwung v. ûsspîung.

utter, uttor = ûtor

uttermæst = ýtemest

utun = wuton

ûtw¯æpnedmann m. _stranger_, BH 354^25.

ûtwærc m. _dysentery_? #Lcd#.

ûtwald m. _outlying wood_, EC 289^17.

ûtwaru f. _foreign defence_, LL.

ûtweallan^7 _to well out, flow forth_, A 4·163.

ûtweard adj. _outside of, going away, striving to get out_.

ûtweardes adv. '_outwards_,' _CP_.

ûtweorc = ûtwærc

ûtwîcing m. _sea-rover_, #Chr# 1098.

ûtyrnende _diuretic, purgative, diarrh[oe]ic_.

ûtyrning (io^2) f. _flux_, MkL 5^25.

ûð- intensitive prefix.

ûðe pret. sg. of unnan.

ûðgende = ûðgenge

ûðgenge _fugitive, alien, fleeting, vanishing, departing_.

ûðm¯æte _huge_, MH 76^1n.

ûðon pret. pl. of unnan.

ûðuta = ûðwita

ûðweot- = ûðwit-

ûðwita (eo^2, u^2) m. _scholar, sage, philosopher, scribe, Pharisee_, Æ.

ûðwitelic = ûðwitlic

ûðwitian _to study philosophy_, #ÆGr# 146^2.

ûðwitlic _philosophical, academical_, WW.

ûðwuta (NG) = ûðwita

ûðwyt- = ûðwit-




=W=


wâ I. (see also wêa) m. _'woe,' affliction, misery, evil_, Æ. II.
interj. (occly. governs d.) _woe! alas!_ CP. wâ lâ, wâ lâ wâ, wei lâ wei
_ah! oh! alas!_

wâc I. adj. _weak, soft, feeble, effeminate, cowardly, timid, pliant_,
Æ, CP: _slender, frail_: _insignificant, mean, poor_, Æ: _bad, vile_.
[_Ger._ weich] II. n. _weakness_, LL. III. pret. 3 sg. of wîcan.

wac- = wæc-

wacan^6 ¶ _to awake, arise, be born, originate_. [v. '_wake_']

waccor = wacor

wâce _weakly, slowly, negligently_.

wacel = wacol

wacen (æ^1, ea^1, a^2, o^2, u^2) f. _wakefulness_: _watching, vigil_:
_division of the night_, NG: _incentive_, DR 63^15 (a^2).

wacian (æ, e) _to be awake, keep awake, watch_, Æ, CP. [v. '_wake_']

wâcian _to become weak, languish_: (±) _waver, be cowardly, flinch_.
[_Ger._ weichen]

waciende _watching, vigilant_.

wâclic _weakly, mean, vile, insignificant, trifling_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ.

wâcmôd n. _faint-hearted, cowardly_, CP: _weak-minded, irresolute_, Æ.

wâcmôdnes f. _weakness (of mind or body)_, _cowardice_, CP.

wâcnes f. _weakness, insignificance_, Æ.

wacnian = wæcnan

wacol _awake, vigilant, watchful, attentive_, Æ. adv. -lîce, Æ.

wacon = wacen

wacor _watchful, vigilant_, CP. adv. -lîce, CP.

wacsan = wascan

wâcscipe m. _weakness, slackness_: _insignificance, contempt_.

-wacu v. niht-w.

wacul = wacol

wâd I. n. '_woad_,' #ÆGr#; Mdf. II. (?) _dragnet_, OEG 61^15 (v. A
31·528).

wad- v. wæd.

wadan^6 _to go, move, stride, advance_: '_wade_,' AO: (+) _traverse,
pervade_.

wadom = waðum

wâds¯æd n. _woad seed_, LL 454[12].

wâdspitl m. _woad-dibble_, LL 455[15].

wadung f. _travelling, going_, Æ.

w¯æ (N, #VPs#) = wâ

wæarhrôd = weargrôd

wæb, wæbb == webb  [[under "web"]]

w¯æc- = wâc-

±w¯æcan _to weaken, oppress, trouble_. [wâc]

wæccan (±) _to watch_: _wake_. [= wacian]

wæcce f. _'watch,' vigil, wakefulness_, Æ, CP.

wæccen = wacen

wæccende _watchful, awake_.

wæccendlîce _watchfully_, GD 242^14.

wæccer = wacor

+w¯æcednes f. _weakness_, ÆH 2·552^29.

wæcen = wacen

wæcg (#Gl#) = wecg

wæcian = wacian

wæcnan, wæcnian [v. also wacan] _to awake, come forth, spring from,
arise, be born_. ['_waken_']

wæd ¶ n. [usu. pl.; wad- in obl. cases] _ford, water, sea, ocean_.

w¯æd f. _robe, dress, apparel, clothing, garment, covering_: _sail_, ES
40·326. ['_weeds_']

+wæd n. _ford, shallow_. [wadan]

w¯æd- = wêd-

w¯ædbrêc fp. _breeches_, Æ.

wædd = wedd

±w¯æde (ê) n. = w¯æd f.

w¯ædelnes (ê) f. _poverty_, CP.

wæden = waden pp. of wadan.

w¯æden _of woad, bluish_, OEG 7^372; 8^374. [wâd]

wæder = weder

w¯æderâp m. _stay, halyard_; pl. _rigging_, WW 515^15.

+w¯ædian _to clothe, dress, equip, furnish_.

w¯ædl (ê, êð) f. _poverty_, CP: _barrenness_, AO.

w¯ædla (ê) _poor, destitute_. as sb. = _beggar, poor man_, Æ, CP.

w¯ædle = w¯ædl

w¯ædlêas _without clothing_.

w¯ædlian _to be poor, destitute, beg_, Æ.

w¯æd-lig (Æ), -ligend (GD) _poor_.

w¯ædlnes = w¯ædelnes

w¯ædlung f. _poverty, want_, Æ: _begging_, Æ.

w¯ædo = wâd

wæf pret. 3 sg. of wefan.

+wæf = +wef

w¯æfan _to clothe_, W 119^6.

w¯æfels (ê) mn. _covering, mantle, cloak, dress, clothing, garment_, Æ.

wæfergange f. _spider_, #CPs# 89^9. [wefan]

wæfergeornnes (¯æ?) f. _eagerness for sight-seeing_, LL (wæfereorn-).

wæferhûs n. _amphitheatre_, ÆL 24^49. [wafian]

wæferlic _belonging to a theatre, theatrical_, OEG 62.

wæfernes f. _show, display, pomp, pageant_, OEG 4465.

wæfer-sên, -sêon = wæfersýn

wæfersolor m. '_pulpitum_,' OEG 3458.

wæferstôw (ea) f. _theatre_, #Lcd#.

wæfersýn (ê^3, êo^3, î^3, îe^3) f. _spectacle, sight, show, display_, Æ.
[wâfian]

wæflian _to speak foolishly_, v. NC 333.

w¯æfon pret. pl. of wefan.

wæfre _unstable, unsteady, wavering, wandering, restless_: _flickering,
expiring_. [wafian]

wæfs = wæps

wæfð, wæft f. _show, spectacle_.

wæfung (#Gl#) = wafung

wæg I. m. = weg. II. pret. 3 sg. of wegan.

w¯æg (â, ê) I. m. _motion_: _wave, billow, flood, sea_. [wegan] II. (±) =
w¯æge. III. = wâg. IV. = hw¯æg

wægan = wegan

±w¯ægan (ê) _to trouble, afflict_, CP: _deceive, falsify_, Æ: (+)
_frustrate_, #Dom# 115.

w¯ægbora m. _child of the waves_? B 1440.

w¯ægbord n. _ship, vessel_, #Gen# 1340.

w¯ægdêor n. _sea-animal_, #Cr# 988.

w¯ægdropa m. _water-drop, tear_, #Gu# 1030.

w¯æge I. f. _weight, scales, balance_, Æ: _'wey' (of cheese, wool,
etc.)_: _'pensum,' burden_. II. ¶ (ê) n. _cup, chalice_.

+w¯æge n. _weight, measure_.

wægel (WW 124^2) = pægel?

wægen == wægn

wægenðîxl = wægneðîxl  [['w¯ænes ðîxl' under "wægn"]]

w¯ægescalu = w¯ægscalu

w¯ægetunge f. _tongue of a balance_, WW 148^19.

w¯ægfær n. _sea-voyage_, #An# 925.

w¯ægfæt n. _water-vessel, clouds_, #Rd# 4^37.

w¯ægfaru f. _track in the sea_, #Ex# 298.

w¯ægflota ¶ m. _(wave-floater), ship_.

w¯æghengest ¶ m. _ship_.

w¯ægholm m. _sea, ocean_, B 217.

wægl¯æst = wegl¯æst  [[variant of "weglêast"?]]

w¯æglîðend ¶ m. _sea-farer, sailor_.

wæglîðende ¶ _seafaring_.

wægn (wægen, w¯æn) m. _carriage_, _'wain_,' '_waggon,' chariot, cart,
vehicle_. Carles w¯æn; w¯ænes ðîxl _the constellation of the Great Bear_.
[wegan]

-wægnan v. be-w.

wægnere (¯æn) m. _waggoner_, WW.

w¯ægnere m. _enticer_, WW 436^12. [w¯ægnian]

wægnest = wegnest

wægn-fær (¯æn) n., -faru f. _chariot-journey_.

wægngehrado (¯æn) _waggon-plank_, WW 267^33.

wægngerefa (¯æn) m. _'carpenturius,' waggon-master_? WW.

wægngewæde (¯æn) n. _waggon-cover_, A 9·264.

+w¯ægnian _to deceive_: _condemn_, NC 297.

wægnscilling m. _tax on waggons_, TC 138.

wægntrêow (¯æn) n. _log given to the carter of a load of wood_, LL
453[21,4].

wægnðol (¯æn) _cart-pin_? WW 343^39.

wægnweg (¯æn) m. _cart-road_, KC.

wægnwyrhta (¯æn) m. _'carpentarius,' cart-wright_, WW.

w¯ægon pret. pl. of wegan.

w¯ægpundern n. weighing-machine.

w¯ægrâp? m. _wave-rope, wave-bond (ice)_, B 1611. [or? w¯ælrâp]

w¯ægryft = wâgrift

w¯ægscalu f. _scale of a balance_, WW 437^19. [scealu; _Ger._ wagschale]

w¯ægstæð n. _sea-shore_, #Rd# 23^2.

w¯ægstrêam m. _current_, #Ex# 311.

w¯ægsweord § n. _sword with wavy pattern_.

w¯ægðel ¶ n. _ship, vessel_.

w¯ægðrêa f. _peril of the sea_, #Gen# 1490.

w¯ægðrêat m. _deluge_, #Gen# 1352.

+w¯æht pp. of +w¯æcan and +w¯ægan.

wæl I. n. [nap. walu] _slaughter, carnage_, AO. w. +slêan _to
slaughter_: _field of battle_: (in pl.) _dead bodies_, AO. [wôl; cp.
_Ger._ walstatt] II. m. = wiell. III. = wel

w¯æl m. _whirlpool, eddy, pool_, Æ: _ocean, sea, river, flood_.

wæl- = wel-

w¯æl- = wêal-

wæla = wela

±w¯ælan _to afflict, vex, torment_, #Gu#, MtR.

wælbedd ¶ n. _slaughter-bed_.

wælbend f. _death-bond, band of destruction_, B 1936.

wælbenn f. _deadly wound_, #Ex# 491.

wælblêat _deadly-pale_? B 2725.

wælceald _deadly cold_, #Sol# 468.

wælcêasega m. _carrion-picker (raven)_, #Ex# 164.

wælclomm m. _deadly fetter_, #Gen# 2128.

wælcræft m. _deadly power_, #Rd# 87^11.

wælcwealm m. _violent death_, #Rd# 2^8.

wæl-cyrige, -cyrie f. _(chooser of the slain), witch, sorceress_. [Ger.
Walküre]

wældêað m. _death in battle, violent death_, B 695.

wældrêor ¶ n. _blood of battle, battle-gore_.

wælegian = weligian

wæler = weler

wælf¯æhð f. _deadly feud_, B 2028.

wælfæðm m. _deadly embrace_, #Ex# 480.

wælfâg _blood-stained_, B 1128.

wælfeall = wælfill

wælfel _greedy for corpses, ghoulish_, #El# 53.

wælfeld m. _battle-field_, #Chr# 937.

wælfill m. _slaughter, death, destruction_.

wælfûs _awaiting death_, B 2420.

wælfyll = wælfill

wælfyllo f. _fill of slaughter_, B 125.

wælfýr ¶ n. _deadly fire_: _funeral pyre_.

wælgæst ¶ m. _murderous stranger_.

wælgâr ¶ m. _deadly spear_.

wælgenga m. _sea-monster_? OEG 5^41; 8^305.

wælgîfre ¶ _bloodthirsty, murderous_.

wælgimm m. _death-bringing gem_? #Rd# 21^4.

wælgr¯ædig _flesh-eating, cannibal_, #An# 135.

wælgrim _fierce, violent, bloody, cruel_: _fateful, dire_. adv.
-lîce, AO.

wælgrimnes f. _cruelty, torture_, GD.

wælgryre m. _deadly horror_, #Ex# 137.

wælhere § m. _army intent on slaughter_.

wælhlem m. _death-stroke_, B 2969.

wælhlence ¶ f. _coat of mail_.

wælhrêow (êa^2) _cruel, fierce, savage, bloodthirsty_, CP. adv. -lîce.

wælhrêownes f. _cruelty, ferocity, atrocity, slaughter_, Æ, CP.

wælhwelp m. _destroying hound_, #Rd# 16^23.

wælig = welig

w¯ælisc = wîelisc

wæll = weall

wæll- = wæl-

wælla = willa II.

wællan (N) = willan

wælle (#VPs#) = wille

wælm == wielm

wælmist ¶ m. _mist of death_.

wælnett n. _death-net_, #Ex# 202.

wælnîð ¶ m. _deadly hostility, war_.

wælnot § m. _fatal mark, baleful inscription_.

wælpîl m. _deadly arrow, dart_, #Gu# 1127.

wælræs ¶ m. _deadly onslaught_.

wælræst = wælrest

wælr¯æw = wælhrêow

w¯ælrâp? m. _flood-fetter_, (_ice_), B 1610?

wælrêaf n. _spoil from the slain_: _act of spoiling the slain_.

wælrêc m. _deadly reek_, B 2661.

wælregn (ll) m. _deluge_, #Gen# 1350.

wælrêow = wælhrêow

wælrest (æ^2) ¶ f. _bed of slaughter, grave_.

wælrûn f. _mystery of carnage_? _war-song_? #El# 28.

w¯ælsc = wîelisc

wælsceaft m. _deadly spear_, B 398.

wælscel n? _carnage_, #Jud# 313.

wælseax n. _dagger_, B 2703.

wælsliht (ea, i, y) m. _slaughter, carnage_, #Chr#: (¶) _combat_.

wælslihta m. _murderer, slayer_, GD 254^22.

wælslîtende _corpse-biting_, W 187^14: _deadly-biting_, W 241^12.

wælspere n. _deadly spear_, #Ma# 322; #Lcd# 175b.

wælsteng m. _spear-shaft_, B 1638.

wælstôw f. _place of slaughter, battle-field_, AO. âgan wælstôwe geweald
_to obtain possession of the battle-field, conquer_.

wælstr¯æl mf. _deadly shaft_, #Gu# 1260.

wælstrêam m. _deadly flood_, #Gen# 1301.

wælsweng m. _deadly thrust_, #Gen# 987.

wælt _part of thigh, sinew_, LL 7[68]. [weald]

wæltan (wv. in NG) = wealtan

wælwang m. _field of the slain_, #An# 1227.

wælweg (#Seaf# 63) = hwælweg

wælwulf ¶ m. _warrior, cannibal_.

w¯ælwyrt = wêalwyrt  [[headword spelled "wealwyrt"]]

wæm = (1) wamm; (2) hwamm

wæm- = wem-

wæmbede _having a great belly_, WW 161^22. [wamb]

wæmman = wemman

w¯æmn (LWS) = w¯æpen

w¯æmnian = w¯æpnian

wæmst- = wæstm-

wæn = wenn

wæn- = wen-

w¯æn == wægn

w¯ænan = wênan

w¯ænes = (1) wâcnes; (2) wôhnes

wæng = wang

wænge = wange

w¯ænunga = wênunga

w¯æpan = wêpan

w¯æpen n. (nap. w¯æp(e)n, w¯æp(e)nu) _'weapon,' sword_; pl. _arms_, Æ,
AO, CP: _membrum virile_.

w¯æpenbora m. _weapon-bearer, warrior, knight_, Æ.

w¯æpend, w¯æpened = w¯æpned

w¯æpen(ge)tæc n. _'wapentake' (subdivision of a riding)_, LL. [cp. _ON._
vâpnatak]

w¯æpengeðræc n. _encounter of spears_? DR 168^3.

w¯æpengewrixl(e) n. _hostile encounter_.

w¯æpenhâd = w¯æpnedhâd

w¯æpenhete m. _armed hate_, #Ap# 80.

w¯æpenhûs n. _armoury_, WW 348^13.

w¯æpenlêas _unarmed_, Æ.

w¯æpenlic _male_, WW.

w¯æpenstr¯æl fm. _arrow_, #PPs# 56^5.

w¯æpentæc = w¯æpengetæc

w¯æpenðracu ¶ f. _storm of weapons_.

w¯æpenðr¯æge _weapon, equipment_? #CrA# 61?

w¯æpenwîfestre = w¯æpnedwîfestre

w¯æpenwiga m. _armed warrior_, #Rd# 15^1.

w¯æpmann (Æ) = w¯æpnedmann

w¯æpn == w¯æpen

w¯æpnahûs = w¯æpenhûs

w¯æpned I. adj. _male_, AO. II. m. _male person_.

w¯æpnedbearn n. _male child_, BH 76^8.

w¯æpnedcild n. _male child_, Æ.

w¯æpnedcynn n. _male species_, Æ.

w¯æpnedhâd m. _male sex_, Æ: _sexual power_, GD 26^30.

w¯æpnedhand f. _male line_, TC 491^32.

w¯æpnedhealf f. _male line_, TC 491^16.

w¯æpnedmann m. _male, man_, AO.

w¯æpnedwîfestre f. _hermaphrodite_, WW.

±w¯æpnian _to arm_, Æ, CP.

w¯æpnmann = w¯æpnedmann

+w¯æpnu np. _arms_, #LPs# 45^10.

w¯æpnung f. _armour_, Æ: (+) _army_.

wæps m. '_wasp_,' Æ. [_L._ vespa]

wær I. (napm. ware) _wary, cautious_, Æ, CP: (w. g.) _aware of_: _ready,
prepared, attentive_. II. ¶ n. _sea, ocean_. [_ON._ verr] III. = wer.
IV. = wearr

w¯ær I. adj. _true, correct_, #Gen# 681. II. f. _faith, fidelity_:
_keeping, protection_: _agreement, treaty, compact, pledge, covenant_:
_bond (of friendship)_.

+w¯ær wg. _'aware' (of), watchful, on one's guard_, _Chr_ 1095.

wær- = war-, wear-, wer-, wier-, wyr-

wæran = werian

wærc (wræc) m. _pain, suffering, anguish_ (A; often confused with WS.
weorc. v. JAW 52).

wærcan _to be in pain_.

wærcsâr (e) n. _pain_, MkR 13^8.

wære = wer II.

w¯ære I. = w¯ær II. II. pret. 2 sg. of wesan.

w¯ærfæst (e^2) _covenant-keeping, honourable, faithful, trusty_.

w¯ærg = wêrig

wærgêapnes f. _argument_, WW 192^1.

w¯ær-genga, -ganga (ê^1) ¶ wm. _one seeking protection, stranger_ (or ?=
wer-).

w¯ærigian = wêrgian

+wærl¯æcan _to warm_, Æ.

±wærlan _to go, pass by_, DR, NG.

wærlêas _incautious, careless_.

w¯ærlêas ¶ _faithless, perfidious_.

wærlic I. _careful, wary, cautious, circumspect_, CP. adv. -lîce, Æ. II.
= werlic

w¯ærlîce adv. _truly_, #Gen# 652?

wærlicnes f. _wariness, caution_, HL 13^263.

w¯ærloga ¶ m. _troth-breaker, traitor, liar, devil_. ['_warlock_';
lêogan]

wærlot n. _craftiness, cunning, deceit_, WW 354^31.

wærna = wrenna

wærnes I. f. _wariness, caution_. II. = weargnes

w¯æron pret. pl. of wesan.

wærsagol _cautious in speech_, W 72^17.

wærscipe m. _cunning, caution, prudence_, AO, CP.

w¯ærstlic = wr¯æstlic

wærword n. _word of warning_, WW.

wærwyrde _cautious in speech_, FT 57.

wæs pret. 1, 3 sg. of wesan.

wæsc f. _ablution, washing_, A 13·441.

+wæsc n. only in wætera +w. '_alluvium_,' WW 179^35.

-wæsce v. scêap-w.

wæscen = wascen pp. of wascan.

wæscere m. _washer_.

wæscern n. _washing-place_, WW 185^2.

wæscestre I. f. _washer, house-keeper, 'presbytera,'_ GD 276. II. m.
_dyer_, GD 191^23.

wæschûs n. _washing-place_.

wæscing m. _washing, ablution_, Ct.

w¯æsend = wâsend

-wæsma v. here-w.

wæsp = wæps

wæst == west

w¯æst- = wêst-

wæstling m. _sheet, blanket_, #Gl#.

wæstm (e) mn. (nap. wæst-mas, -me) _growth, increase_: _plant, produce,
offspring, fruit_, Æ, CP: _result, benefit, product_: _interest, usury_:
_abundance_: _stature, form, figure_. [weaxan]

wæstmaseten f. _planting_, Mt 5^13.

wæstmb¯ære _fruitful_, Æ, CP.

+wæstmb¯ærian _to be or make fruitful_, WW.

wæstmb¯ærnes f. _fruitfulness, fertility_, Æ.

wæstmb¯æro f. _fruitfulness_, AO 58^20.

wæstmbêorennes = wæstmb¯ærnes

wæstmberende _fertile_, AO.

wæstmberendnes f. _fruitfulness, fertility_, BH 74^30#b#.

wæstme f. = wæstm

wæstmfæst _fruitful_, ANS 122^247.

wæstmian _to grow, increase, bear fruit_.

wæstmlêas _fruitless, unfruitful_, Æ.

wæstmlic _fruitful_, DR 18^13.

wæstmsceatt m. _interest, usury_.

wæsðm = wæstm

w¯æt (â, ê) I. adj. _'wet,' moist_, AO. II. n. _liquid, drink_, Æ. ¯æt
and w. _food and drink_, Æ.

w¯æta m. _wetness, moisture, humours, fluid, water_, Æ, CP: _drink_, Æ.

±w¯ætan _to wet, moisten, water_, #ÆGr#.

w¯æte f. = w¯æta m.

wæter (e) n. (gs. wætres, wæteres) '_water_,' Æ, CP; Mdf: _sea_.

wæterâdl f. _dropsy_, #Lcd#.

wæter-¯ædre, -æddre f. _spring of water, source_, Æ.

wæterælfâdl f. _a disease_, #Lcd#.

wæterælfen f. _water-elf_, WW 457^8.

wæter-berend (OEG 871), -berere (WW) m. _water-bearer, sutler,
camp-follower_.

wæterbôh m. _succulent shoot, sprig_, WW 149^25.

wæterbolla m. _dropsy_, #Lcd#.

wæterbora m. _water-bearer_.

wæterbrôga ¶ m. _frightful flood_.

wæterbûc m. _water-vessel, water-pot, pitcher_, Æ.

wæterbucca m. _water-spider_, WW 122^4.

wæterburne f. _water-stream_, DD 3.

wæterbyden f. _bucket, cask_, WW 503^14.

wæterclâð m. _towel_, RB 59^7.

wætercrôg m. _water-pot_, WW 484^28.

wætercrûce f. _water-pot_, Cp 283#u#.

wæterdrinc m. _a drink of water_, NC 331.

wæter-egsa, -egesa ¶ m. _water-terror_.

wæterelfen = wæterælfen

wæterfæsten n. _water-fastness, place protected by water_, #Chr# 894#a#.

wæter-fæt n., nap. -fatu _water-pot, flagon_, Æ.

wæterflaxe f. _water-pitcher_, _Mk_ 14^13. [v. '_flask_']

wæterflôd m. _water-flood, inundation, deluge_, Æ, AO.

wæterfrocga m. _water frog_, NC 331.

wæterful _dropsical_, WW.

wæterfyrhtnes f. _hydrophobia_, WW 112^24.

wætergât f. _water spider_, WW 122^4.

wætergebl¯æd n. _watery pustule_? #Lcd# 162b.

wætergefeall n. _waterfall_, CC 116.

wætergelâd n. _conduit_, WW 339^4.

wætergelæt n. _aqueduct_, WW 211^13.

wætergesceaft f. _nature of water_, GD 220^17.

wætergewæsc n. '_alluvium_,' WW 187^1.

wætergrund m. _sea-bottom, depth_, #PPs# 106^23.

wætergyte m. _'Aquarius' (sign of the Zodiac)_, #Lcd# 3·246^4.

wæterhæfern m. _crab_, #Lcd# 16b.

wæterhâlgung f. _consecration of water_, DR 117^1.

wæterhelm m. _covering of ice_, #GnE# 74?

±wæterian _to water, moisten, irrigate_, Æ, CP: _lead (cattle) to
water_, Æ.

wæterig _watery, watered_, Æ.

wæterisc (e) _watery, moist_.

wæterlêas _waterless_, Æ.

wæterlêast f. _want of water_, HL 9·177.

wæterlic _aquatic_, GPH 394.

wætermêle (¯æ^3) m. _bowl, basin_, #ÆGr#.

wætern¯ædre f. _water-snake_, WW.

wæterordâl n. _water-ordeal_, LL 388[2].

wæterpund n. '_norma, libella aquatica_,' WW 150^37.

wæterpytt m. _water-pit, well_, Æ.

wæterrîðe? f. _conduit_ (v. OEG 1714n).

wæterscêat m. _napkin, towel_, WW 127^3.

wæter-scipe (Æ, CP), -scype m. _sheet of water, waters_: _conduit_.

wæterscýte f. _towel, napkin_, Æ.

wætersêað m. _water-pit, cistern_.

wætersêoc _dropsical_, Æ.

wætersêocnes f. _dropsy_, Æ.

wæterspryng m. _water-spring_, #Da# 386.

wætersteall m. _standing water, pond_.

wæterstefn f. _voice of waters_, #PPs# 92^4.

wæterstoppa m. _bucket_, GD 11^22.

wæterstrêam m. _river_.

wætertîge m. _canal, aqueduct_, #HGl# 418^50.

wæterðêote f. _conduit, flood-gate, torrent, cataract_, Æ.

wæter-ðîsa, -ðissa m. _(water-traverser) whale_, #Whale# 50: _ship_,
#Gu# 1303.

wæterðrûh f. _water-pipe, conduit_, #Gl#.

wæterðrýð f. _rush of waters_, #PPs# 106^22.

wæterung f. _watering, providing with water_, Æ.

wæterw¯ædlnes f. _dearth of water_, ÆL 23b^538.

wæterweg m. _watercourse_.

wæterwrîte f. _'clepsydra,' water-clock_, WW 378^39.

wæterwyll m. _spring of water, fountain_, LL 312[5,1].

wæterwyrt f. _water star-wort_.

wæterýð f. _billow_, B 2242.

w¯ætian _to be wet_, WW 447^1.

wætig (GPH 389) = pætig  [[headword spelled "p¯ætig"]]

wætla m. _swathe, bandage_, #Lcd# 78a.

w¯ætnes f. _moisture_, LkL 8^6 (ê).

wætrian = wæterian

wætter (N) = wæter

w¯ætung f. _wetting, moisture_, #Lcd#.

wæð n. _ford_, #Chr# 1073#d#. [_ON._ vað]

-w¯æða v. here-w.

w¯æðan _to wander, roam about_: _hunt_. [wâð]

w¯æðeburne f. _fishing stream_? BC (Mdf).

w¯æðelnes = w¯ædelnes

w¯æðl = w¯ædl

w¯æwærðlic _good_? A 8·335^30. adv. (e, y) -lîce _successfully_? A 8·298;
W 169^1.

wæx (N) == weax

w¯æx = wêox pret. 3 sg. of weaxan.

wæxð pres. 3 sg. of wascan.

wafian _to 'wave,'_ Æ.

wâfian _to be agitated, astonished, amazed, gaze at, wonder at, admire_,
Æ: _hesitate_.

wâfiende '_theatralis_,' '_visibilis_,' OEG 233.

waforlic = wæferlic

wafung (æ, e) f. _spectacle, display, pageantry, sight_, Æ:
_astonishment, amazement_, Æ. [wafian]

wafungstede m. _place for shows, theatre_, WW.

wafungstôw f. _place for shows, theatre_, #Lcd# 3·206^16.

wâg I. (¯æ) m. _wall_, Æ, AO, CP. [_Goth._ waddjus] II. = w¯æg I.

wâghrægel n. _tapestry, vail_, NG.

wagian _to move, shake, swing, totter_, Æ. ['_wag_'; wegan]

wagn = wægn

wâgon = w¯ægon pret. pl. of wegan.

wâgrift (e, y) n. _wall-hanging, tapestry, vail, curtain_.

wâgðeorl _doorway_? #LPs# 61^4. [ðyrel]

wâgðyling (wâh-) f. _wainscoting_, WW 147^31. [wâg, ðille]

wagung f. _moving, shaking_, #Lcd#.

wâh == wâg

wâhmelu n. _fine meal_, #Lcd# 101b. [_OHG._ wâhi]

wahsan = wascan

wal = wæl I.

wal- = wæl-, weal-

wala (N) = wela I.

wâlâ! wâlâwâ! interj. (w. g.) _oh! alas! wo!_ ['_wellaway_'; wâ]

walan v. walu I.

Wâlas = Wêalas

walc- = wealc-

wal-crigge, -cyrge = wælcyrige

walcspinl (o^1) f. _curling-iron, crisping-pin_, WW 198^1; OEG 26^70.

wald (N, #VPs#) == weald

walde (CP 443^11) = wolde

waldmora = wêalmora

Wâle (= êa) f. _Welshwoman, female slave_, #Rd#.

waler (DR) = weler

walh == wealh

wâlic _woful, lamentable_, #Sat# 100.

wall (#VPs#) == weall

wallað (ÐR) = pres. pl. of wællan = willan

walm (N) = wielm

walu I. f. _ridge, bank_, Ct: _rib, comb (of helmet)_, B 1031. II. f? m?
_weal, mark of a blow_, OEG. III. v. wæl I.

wâlwyrt = wêalwyrt  [[headword spelled "wealwyrt"]]

wam = wamm

wamb (o) f. _belly, stomach_, Æ, CP, #VPs#: '_womb_': _hollow_? KC 3·52.

wambâdl f. _stomach-ache_, #Lcd# 81a.

wambhord n. _contents of the belly_, #Rd# 18^10.

wambscyldig? _gluttonous_? v. NC 331.

wambsêoc _having pain in the stomach_, #Lcd#.

wamcwide (o) ¶ _shameful speech, curse, blasphemy_.

wamd¯æd (o) ¶ f. _deed of shame, crime_.

wamfreht (o) n. _sinful divination_, WW.

wamful ¶ _impure, shameful, sinful, bad_.

wamlust m. _allurement, enticement_, A 13·28; OEG 7^37.

wamm (o) I. mn. _stain, spot, disgrace, defect, defilement, sin, evil,
crime_: _injury, loss, hurt, misfortune_. II. adj. _shameful, bad_.

wamsceaða (o) ¶ m. _sin-stained, foe, devil_.

wamscyldig _sinful, criminal_, #Gen# 949 (o).

wamwlite (o) m. _wound in the face_, LL.

wamwyrcende (o) _worker of sin_, #Cr# 1093.

wan I. (once +; o) (usu. indecl. and used predicatively) _wanting,
deficient, lacking, absent_, CP. ânes wan ðe ðritig _or_ ânes wana
ðrittigum _twenty-nine_. II. pret. 3 sg. of winnan. III. = wann

±wana m. _lack, want, deficiency_, Æ. w. bêon _to lack, fail_.

wan¯æht (o) f. _want, poverty_, ¶Hy 4^102.

wananbêam m. _spindle-tree_, #Gl#.

wancol (e) _unstable, unsteady, tottering, vacillating, weak_. #Bo#.

wand I. pret. 3 sg. of windan. II. f? _mole (animal)_, #Gl#.

+wand n. _shamefastness_, RB 68^8: _hesitation, scruple_. [windan]

wandeweorpe f. _mole (animal)_, Æ(u^3).

wandian (o) _to hesitate, flinch, desist from, omit, neglect_, Æ, CP:
_fear, stand in awe_, Æ: _have regard to, care for_. [windan]

wandlung f. _changeableness_, #Bo# 15^27.

-wandodlîce v. unfor-w.

wandrian _to 'wander,' roam, fly round, hover_, CP: _change_: _stray,
err_.

wandung f. _feeling of respect_, NC 332.

wand-wurp, -wyrp = wandeweorpe

wanfâh (o) _dark-hued_, #Rd# 53^6.

wanfeax (o) _dark haired_, #Rd# 13^8.

wanfôta m. _pelican_, WW 287^10.

wanfýr (o) n. _lurid flame_, #Cr# 966.

wang I. (o) n. _plain, mead, field, place_: _world_. II. m. = wange

wangbeard m. _whisker_, #Lcd# 73a.

wange (e, o) n. _jaw, cheek_. [_Ger._ wange]

wangere m. _pillow, bolster_.

wangstede m. _place, locality_.

wangtôð m. _molar, grinder_.

wangturf f. _meadow-turf_, #Lcd# 1·400^7.

wanhæf- = wanhaf-

+wanh¯ælan _to weaken_, Æ.

wanh¯ælð f. _weakness, sickness_, #Sc# 54^19.

wanh¯æw (o) _bluish_, WW 376^23.

wanhafa m. _poor man_, #SPs# 85^1.

wanhafol _needy_, Æ.

wan-hafolnes, -haf(e)nes (æ) f. _want, hunger_.

wanhâl _unsound, weak, ill, sick, maimed_, Æ, CP.

+wanhâlian _to make weak_, HL 12^51.

wanhâlnes f. _weakness, ill-health_.

wanhlýte _having no share in, free from_, WW 398^33

wanhoga m. _thoughtless one, fool_.

wan-hygd, -hýd ¶ f. _carelessness, recklessness, daring_.

wanhygdig (hýdig) ¶ _careless, rash_.

±wanian _to diminish_ (tr.), _lessen, curtail, injure, impair, take
from_, Æ, AO: _infringe, annul_: _diminish_ (intr.), _dwindle, decline,
fade, decay_, Æ, CP: _'wane' (moon)_.

wânian _to complain, bewail, lament, bemoan_, AO. [_Ger._ weinen]

wan-iendlic, -gendlic _diminutive_, #ÆGr#.

wann I. (o) _dark, dusky, lurid_. ['_wan_'] II. pret. 3 sg. of winnan.

wannhâl = wanhâl

wannian _to become dark-coloured, turn black_, NC 332: _become
discoloured_? ÆP 178^11.

wanniht _wan, pale, livid_, WW 431^21.

wans¯ælig ¶ _unhappy_.

wansceaft ¶ f. _misery, misfortune_.

wansceaf-ta m. (or -te f.) _a disease_, #Lcd#.

wanscrýd _poorly clad_, ÆH 500^17.

wansêoc '_commitialis_'? v. OEG 4937.

wansian _to diminish_, #Chr# 656#e#.

wanspêd f. _poverty, want_, AO.

wanspêdig _poor, indigent_, Æ.

wanung (o) f. _waning, decrease, deprivation, diminution, loss, injury,
weakening_, Æ.

wânung f. _howling, lamentation_, Æ.

wanwegende _waning (moon)_, #Lcd#.

wâpe _napkin, towel_? IM 122^23.

wapelian, wapolian _to bubble, froth, exhale, emit, pour forth_.

wapul m? _bubble, froth_, WW.

war = wearr

wâr I. n. _sea-weed_, #Gl#: _sand_. II. = w¯ær

wara, gs. of waru.

-waran v. burg-, ceaster-, eorð-w.

waras (N) = weras nap. of wer I.

-waras v. burg-, eorð-w.  [[under "eorðwaran"]]

warað = waroð

ward = (1) weard; (2) wearð (weorðan)

-ware v. burg-, eorð-, ceaster-w.  [[under "ceasterwaran"]]

waren- = warn-

warht = worht

warian _to beware_: (±) _guard, protect, defend_: _warn_, CP: (¶) _hold,
possess, attend_: (¶) _inhabit_. [wær]

wârig _weedy, dirty_, #GnE# 99.

wâriht _full of sea-weed_, #Gl#.

waritrêo = weargtrêow

warnian (ea, are) (±) _to 'warn,' caution_, Æ: (±) _take warning, take
heed, guard oneself against_, Æ, CP: _deny (oneself, etc.)_. [wearn]

warnung (ea) f. '_warning_': _foresight, caution_. [_Ger._ warnung]

waroð (a^1, ea^1, e^1, a^2, e^2, u^2) n. _shore, strand, beach_.

wâroð n. _alga, sea-weed_, #Rd# 41^49.

waroðfaruð m. _surf_, #An# 197.

waroðgewinn (u^2) n. surf, #An# 439.

warp = wearp I.

warr = wearr

warscipe = wærscipe

warð I. (N) = waroð. II. (N) = wearð pret. 3 sg. of weorðan.

waru I. f. _'ware,' article of merchandise_, Æ. II. f. _shelter,
protection, care, custody, guard, defence, vindication_, Æ, AO.

-waru v. burg-, ciric-, eorð-w.  [[under "eorðwaran"]]

waruð = waroð

wâruð = wâroð

was = wæs

-wâsa v. wudu-w.

wascan^6 (æ; acs, a(c)x) _to 'wash,' bathe, lave_: _envelop_, B 3115
(or ?= weaxan).

wase (v. OEG 1818) f. _mire, marsh_.

  [[Entry in first edition:
  wâse f. _ooze, mud, dirt, filth, mire, marsh, moor, water meadow,
  foreshore_. [_Ger._ wiese] ]]

wâsend (¯æ) m. _'weasand,' windpipe, gullet_.

wasescite f. _cuttlefish_, WW 181^7. [wase, scêotan]

wâst pres. 2 sg. of witan.

wât I. pres. 3 sg. of witan. II. pret. 3 sg. of wîtan. III. = w¯æt

watel (o^2, u^2) m. _'wattle,' hurdle, covering_: (pl.) _thatching_.

water = wæter

watol = watel

watr- = wætr-, wæter-

watul = watel

wâð ¶ f. _wandering, journey_: _pursuit, hunt, hunting, chase_.

waðema = waðuma  [[under "waðum"]]

wâðol _wandering_? or m. _full moon_? #Fin# 8?

wað-um, -uma ¶ m. _wave, flood, stream, sea_.

wâwa = wêa

wâwan^7 _to blow (of wind)_, #Rd# 41^81.

waxan = (1) wascan; (2) weaxan

waxgeorn = weaxgeorn

we (ê) pron. (1st pers. plur.) g. ûser, d. ûs, acc. ûs(ic) '_we_.'

wêa m. _misfortune, evil, harm, trouble_: _grief, woe, misery_: _sin,
wickedness_.

weacen = wæcen

wêacwânian _to lament_, #Sat# 320.

wêad¯æd ¶ f. _evil deed_.

wêadhôc (Ep 887) = wêodhôc

weadu (K) = wudu

wêafod = wêofod

weag = weg

wêagesîð m. _companion in trouble_.

weagian = wagian

weahte pret. 3 sg. of weccan.

weahxan = weaxan

weal = (1) weall; (2) wæl

wêal == wealh

weal- = weall-, wel-

wêalâf ¶ f. _wretched remnant_.

wêaland = wêalland

Wêalas (pl. of wealh) _the Welsh_: _Wales_. West Wê(a)las _West-Welsh,
Cornish_.

+wealc n. _rolling, tossing motion_: _attack_, #Chr# 1100.

wealca (a) m. ¶_billow, rolling wave_: _light floating garment_.

wealcan^7 (±) _to move round, revolve, roll, toss_, CP: _fluctuate_:
_revolve in one's mind, discuss, scheme, reflect_, Æ, CP: _wrap round,
twist, curl_; OEG: (+) _traverse_. ['_walk_']

wealcere m. _fuller_, WW 407^29.

±wealcian (a) _to curl, roll up_, OEG.

wealcol _mobile, not firmly fixed_, GPH 399^441.

wealcspinl (a, o) f. _crisping-pin_, OEG, WW.

Wêalcynn n. _the Welsh kin_, EC 146^24.

weald I. (a) m. _weald, forest, wood, grove_, AO: _bushes, foliage_,
#Gen# 846. ['_wold_'] II. m. _power_, AO (usu. +). III. _powerful_, RB
117^5. IV. conj. _perhaps, possibly, haply, lest_, Æ.

+weald n. _might, power_: _control, command, dominion_. his gewealdes
_of his own accord, intentionally_: _protection_: _subjection_: _groin_:
_muscles of the neck_? LL 88[77].

±wealdan^7 (a) w. g. d. (instr.) and a. _to rule, control, determine,
direct, command, govern, possess_, AO, CP: _wield (a weapon)_,
_exercise_: _cause, bring about_, CP.

wealdb¯ære n. _place affording mast for swine_, EC 60^23.

+wealden I. adj. _subject (to)_, _easily controlled_: _inconsiderable,
small_. II. adv. _moderately_.

wealdend (a) I. m. _leader, controller, ruler, lord, king (often of
God)_. II. f. _female ruler_.

±wealdende _ruling, powerful_.

Wealdendfæder m. _Heavenly Father_.

+wealdendlîce _powerfully_, #PPs# 135^16.

wealdendras late nap. of wealdend.

+wealdenmôd _self-controlled_, #Cra# 70.

wealdes (usu. +) _of one's own accord_, CP 198^22.

wealdgenga m. _robber, thief_, Æ.

±wealdleðer n. _rein, bridle_, Æ.

wealdmoru = wêalmoru  [[redirected to "wealhmoru"]]

wealdnes (a) f. _rule_, #VPs# 144^13.

wealdswaðu f. _forest-track_, B 1403 (a^1).

wealdung f. _government, rule_.

weale = wale  [[form of "walu"?]]

wêales v. wealh.

wealfæsten = weallfæsten

wealg _nauseous_, CP 447^18.

wealgat = weallgeat

wealh (a) m. (gs. wêales) _foreigner, stranger, slave_: _Briton,
Welshman_.

wealhât _boiling hot, red-hot_, #Lcd# 96a.

wealhbaso f. _foreign red, vermilion_, #Gl#.

Wealhcynn n. _men of Wales, Britons_.

wealhen = wîelen

wealhfæreld (a) n. _a force which patrolled the Welsh border_? KC
2·60^27.

wealh-gefêra, -gerêfa m. _commander of the_ 'wealhfæreld,' #Chr# 897#a#.

wealhhâfoc m. _foreign hawk, falcon_.

wealhhnutu (a) f. (_foreign nut_), '_walnut_,' WW 452^34.

wealhisc = wîelisc

wealh-moru, -more (a^1) f., -mora m. _carrot, parsnip_.

wealhstôd m. _interpreter, translator_, Æ, CP: _mediator_, CP.

Wealhðêod f. _Welsh nation_, LL.

wealhwyrt = wêalwyrt  [[headword spelled "wealwyrt"]]

wealian _to be defiant_? ÆL 12^48.

wêalic _woeful, sorrowful_, #Wy# 12.

weall I. (a, æ) m. _'wall,' dike, earthwork, rampart, dam_, Æ, AO, CP;
Mdf: (¶) _rocky shore, cliff_. [_L._ vallum] II. = wæl. III. = wiell

weallan^7 (±) _to be agitated, rage, toss, well, bubble, seethe, foam,
be hot, boil_, Æ, AO, CP: _swarm_: _flow_, Æ. ûp w. _to rise (of a
river)_, AO. [_Ger._ wallen]

wêalland n. _foreign country_, #Gen# 2706 (weal-): _Normandy_, #Chr#
1040#e#. [wealh]

Wêallas = Wêalas

weallclif n. _sea-cliff_, B 3132.

wealldîc f. _a walled ditch_? KC 5·346^19.

wealldor n. _door in a wall_, #Cr# 328.

wealle f. _star-wort_.

+wealled = +weallod

weallende _boiling, fervid, ardent, energetic, fiery_.

weallfæsten n. _walled place, rampart, fortification, fortress_.

weallgeat ¶ n. _rampart-gate, postern_.

weallgebrec n. _wall-breaking, act of making a breach_, AO 134^30.

weallgeweorc n. _building of a wall_, Æ _destruction of walls_, #ÆGr#
12^5.

weallian _to go abroad, travel, wander_: _go as pilgrim_.

weallîm m. _cement, mortar_, Æ (#Gen# 11^3).

wêallisc = wîelisc

+weallod _walled_, Æ.

weallstân ¶ m. _stone used in building_.

weallsteall m. _wall-place, foundation_? #Wa# 88.

weallstêap ¶ _steep as a wall_, #Gen#.

weallstilling (y^2) m. _repair of walls_.

weallstôw = wælstôw

weallðr¯æd (a^1) m. _plumb-line_, WW 522^27.

weallung (a, y) f. _agitation, fervour, zeal_.

weallwala ¶ m. _part of a house-wall_? _foundation_? #Ruin# 21.

weallweg (a^1) m. _walled road_? Ct.

weallwyrhta m. _mason_, #Gl#.

weallwyrt = wealwyrt

wêal-mora, -more = wealhmoru

wealnes (#CPs#) = wealdnes

wealowian = wealwian

wealsâda m. _cord (for binding slaves)_? #PPs# 139^5. [wealh]

wealstilling (y^2) = weallstilling

wealstôd = wealhstôd

wealt I. _shaky, unsteady_. II. = wielt pres. 3 sg. of wealdan.

wealtan ? _to turn about, roll, reel, stagger_.  [[from first edition]]

wealweorc n. _masonry_, Æ.

wealwian (a, y) _to roll_ (intr.), '_wallow_,' CP: _roll_ (tr.): _dry
up, shrivel, wither, decay_.

wealwyrt (a, æ) f. _dwarf elder, endive_. [wealh]

wêamêt, wêamêtto f. _passion, anger_, Æ.

wêamôd _ill-humoured, angry_, CP.

wêamôdnes f. _anger, passion, impatience_, Æ, CP.

weaps = wæps

wear = (1) wearr; (2) hwer

wear- = wær-

wearas = weras npl. of wer.

wearc = wærc

weard I. fm. _watching_, _'ward,' protection, guardianship_, AO, CP:
_advance post_, AO: _waiting for, lurking, ambuscade_. II. m. _keeper,
watchman, guard, guardian, protector_, AO: (¶) _lord, king_: (¶)
_possessor_. III. adv. _towards, to_. wið...weard _towards_. IV. =
wearð. V. '_sandix_,' v. A 30·249.

weardian _to watch, guard, keep, protect, preserve_: _hold, possess,
occupy, inhabit_. lâst w. _keep the track of, follow closely_. swaðe w.
_remain behind_. leger w. _keep one's bed_.

weardmann m. _watchman, guard, patrol_, Æ.

weardseld, weardsetl (Æ) n. _guardhouse, watch-tower_.

weardsteall m. _watch-tower_, WW.

weardwîte n. _penalty for not keeping guard_, TC 411^31.

wearf I. (EC 202) = wearp pret. 3 sg. of weorpan. II. = hwearf

wearg (e) I. m. _(wolf), accursed one, outlaw, felon, criminal_, Æ. II.
(-erig, -yrig) adj. _wicked, cursed, wretched_. [_ON._ vargr]

weargberende _villainous_, WW 407^27.

weargbr¯æde (-geb-) f. a _warty eruption, impetigo, stye in the eye,
tetter, ringworm, mole, freckle_. [wearr]

weargnes (æ, e, y) f. _evil, malice, cunning_.

weargrôd f. _scaffold, gallows_, #Gl#.

weargtreafu (rht) np. _home of the damned, hell_, #El# 927.

weargtrêow (ari-) n. _gallows_, Ct.

weargung (e) f. _misery_, #EPs# 87^19.

wearh I. == wearg. II. = wearr

wêariht = wearriht  [[under "wearrig"]]

wearm '_warm_,' Æ, CP. adv. -e.

wearmelle = wurmille

±wearmian (eo, y) _to become warm_, Æ, CP.

wearmlic _warm_, #Da# 350.

wearmnes f. _warmth_, ÆL 11^160.

wearn I. f. _reluctance, repugnance, refusal, denial_, CP: _resistance_:
_reproaches, abuse_. [waru] II. = worn

wearn- = warn-, wearrn-

wearnm¯ælum (ê) adv. _in troops_, WW 25^1. [worn]

wearnwîslîce av. _obstinately_, WW.

wearod, wearoð = waroð

wearp I. (a) m. _'warp,' threads stretched lengthwise in a loom_: _twig,
osier_. [weorpan] II. pret. 3 sg. of weorpan.

wearpfæt n. _basket_, WW.

wearr (a, æ, eo) m. _wart, callosity_, Æ.

wearrig (Æ), wearriht _warty, knotty_.

wearrihtnes f. _knottiness, roughness (of skin)_, #Gl#.

wearrnes (wearn-) f. _knottiness_.

weart, wearte (a, e) f. '_wart_.'

weartere (æ) m. _occupier, dweller_, #Chr# 565. [weard]

wearð I. n. = weorð. II. pret. 3 sg. of weorðan. III. = waroð

wearð- = weorð-

wêas adv. _by chance, accidentally_, CP. mid w. _by chance_.

weasc- = wæsc-

wêasgelimp n. _a chance occurrence_, WW 410^10.

wêaspell n. _evil tidings_, B 1315.

weastern (#Chr# 1015) = western  [[form of "westerne"?]]

weastm = wæstm

wêatâcen ¶ n. _sign of grief_.

wêaðearf f. _woful need_, #Wif# 10.

weax (e) n. '_wax_,' AO.

weaxæppel m. _ball of wax_.

±weaxan (e) I. sv^7 _to 'wax,' grow, be fruitful, increase, become
powerful_, Æ, AO, CP. II. = wascan

weaxberende m. _candle-bearer, acolyte_, DR 195^8 (io^2).

weaxbred (e) n. _writing-tablet_, Æ: _diagram, list_, A 8·332.

weaxcandel (e^1, o^2) f. _wax candle_.

weaxen pp. of weaxan.

weaxgeorn (a) _desirous of increase, very greedy_, WW 102^13.

weaxgesceot n. _payment made in wax_, W 171^1.

weaxhlâf m. _wax tablet_, #Lcd#.

weaxhlâfsealf f. _wax salve_, #Lcd# 92b.

±weaxnes f. _increase, growth_.

weaxscot = weaxgesceot

weaxsealf (e) f. _wax salve_.

weaxung f. _growth, increase_.

web, webb n. _'web,' weft_: _woven work, tapestry_, Æ. [wefan]

webba m. _weaver_, EC, WW.

webbêam m. _weaver's beam_, WW.

webbestre f. _female weaver_, WW 188^11.

webbgeweorc n. _weaving_, HL, MH.

webbian _to weave, contrive_.

webbung (hw) f. _plotting, conspiracy_, OEG 2975: '_scena_' (= wâfung?
v. OEG 2920).

webgerêðru np. _weaver's implement_? WW 294^16.

webgerod n. _weaver's implement_, Cp 1988.

webhôc m. _weaver's comb, reed_? WW.

weblic _pertaining to a weaver_, #Gl#.

websceaft m. _weaver's beam_, WW 293^39.

webt¯æg (æ) f. _weaving-thread_, OET 615. [têag]

webtâwa m. _thread, line_, WW 433^8.

wêbung (Cp 180#s#) = wâfung  [[headword spelled "wafung"]]

webwyrhta m. _fuller_.

wecca = weoca  [[form of "weoce"?]]

weccan (±) _to awaken, arouse_, CP: _call up, bring forth, produce_:
_recall_: _exhort, encourage_: _move, set in motion_: _kindle_. [wacan]

weccend m. _instigator_, GPH 393.

wêce = wâc I.

wecedrenc m. _emetic_, #Lcd#.

wecg m. '_wedge_': _mass of metal, lump_, Æ: _piece of money_, Æ.

wecgan _to move, agitate, drive hither and thither_: _be moved_.

wecian (#VPs#) = wacian

wecnian = wæcnian  [[under "wæcnan"]]

wed = wedd

wêd == w¯æd

+wêd I. n. _fury, rage, madness_. [wôd] II. '_obliquus, distortus_,' ZDA
31·9^168. [wôh]

±wêdan (¯æ) _to be mad, rage_, Æ, AO, CP. [wôd]

wêd-beorge, -berge = wêdeberge

wedbrice = wedbryce

wedbrôðor m. _pledged brother (in a brotherhood of compact, not of
blood)_, #Chr#. [wedd]

wedbryce m. _breach of agreement, treachery_.

wedd n. _pledge, agreement, covenant, security_, Æ, AO, CP: _dowry_, WW.

±weddian _engage, pledge oneself, covenant, promise, vow_: _give to
wife, betroth_: _'wed,' marry_.

weddung f. _pledging, betrothal_, #Nic# 474^33.

wêde I. _raging, mad_. [wôd] II. (A) = w¯æde

+wêde n. _fury, rage, madness_, Æ. [wôd]

wêdeberge f. _hellebore_.

wêdehund m. _mad dog_, #Lcd, Met#.

wêdelnes (#VPs#) = wêðelnes

wêden (MF 178) = w¯æden

wêdendsêoc _mad_, GD 135n; 223.

wêdenheort I. _mad, insane_, WW. II. n. _madness_.

wêdenheortnes f. _madness, frenzy_, CP.

weder I. n. _'weather,' air_, AO: _sky, firmament_: _breeze, storm,
tempest_. II. = weðer

+weder = +wider

wederblâc _bleached by the weather_, A 8·449.

wederburg f. _exposed town_, #An# 1699.

wedercandel f. _sun_, #Ph# 187.

wederdæg m. _day of fine weather_, #Az# 96.

wederfest _weather-bound_, #Chr# 1046#e#.

wederian _to exhibit a change of weather_.

wedertâcen n. _sun_, #Gu# 1267.

+wederu np. _weather_. [_OHG._ giwitiri]

wederung (æ) f. _(bad) weather_, #Chr# 1085.

wederwolcen n. _cloud_, #Ex# 75.

wedewe = wuduwe

+wedfæstan (wet-) _to betroth_, Cp 635#s#.

wêding f. _madness_, GD 164^27; WW 409^38.

wêdl- = w¯ædl-

wedlâc n. _pledge, plighted troth, 'wedlock'_.

wedloga m. _violator of agreement, traitor_. [lêogan]

+wef n. _woof, web_.

wêf- = wâf-, w¯æf-, wêof-

wefan^5 (eo) (±) _to 'weave,'_ Æ: _devise, contrive, arrange_.

wefl I. f. _woof, warp_, #Gl#: _an implement for weaving_. II. = wifel

weft, wefta m. _weft_, WW.

weg I. (æ) m. _'way,' direction_, Æ, AO: _path, road, highway_, Mdf:
_journey_, Æ: _course of action_. ealne w. (ealneg) adv. _always_. on w.
(aweg) adv. _away_. be...wege _on the way (to)_ [_Ger._ weg] II. =
wæg II.

wêg = (1) w¯æge; (2) wîg

weg- = onweg-

wêg- = w¯æg-

wegan^5 (±) _to carry, support, sustain, bear, bring_, CP: _move_:
_wear_: (±) _'weigh,' measure_.

+wegan _to fight_, B 2400.

weg-brâde, -br¯æde (Æ) f. _way-bread, plantain, dock_.

wegfarende (¯æ, ê) _wayfaring_, Æ.

wegfêrend m. _wayfarer, traveller_, GD.

wegfôr f. _travel, journey_, WW 423^33.

wegg = wecg

weggedâl n. _road-dividing, cross-way_, #Gl#.

weggel¯æte fn. _junction of roads_, #Gl#, Ct.

weggê-sîð? -sîða? (v. OEG 861) _travelling companion_.

weggewit n. _aberration (of mind)_, #CPs# 115^11.

weg-lâ interj. '_euge_'! #PPs# 69^4.

weglêas _out of the way, erroneous_: _without a road_.

weglêast (î^2) f. _trackless place, wilderness_, #ARSPs# 106^40.

wegnest n. _food for a journey, viaticum_.

wegrêaf n. _highway robbery_, LL.

wegtwiflung f. _branching of roads_, WW 179^16. [= -twislung]

wêgur = wîgâr

wehsan = weaxan

wehte pret. 3 sg. of weccan.

wei v. wâ.

weig = weg

wel I. adv. (comp. bet) _'well,' abundantly, very, very easily, very
much_: _fully_: _nearly_: pleonastic (as in êac w. = also), sometimes =
_indeed, to be sure_. tô w. _too well_. w. nêah _nearly, almost_. w.
hw¯ær, w. genw¯ær _for the most part, nearly everywhere_. wella _alas!_
(cp. wâlâ). II. = wæl. III. = wiell

wel- = hwel-, wæl-, weal-, wiel-

wêl- = wîel-

wela (a, ea, eo) m. _'weal,' prosperity, happiness, riches_ (often
in pl.), AO, CP.

Wêland m. _the Smith-God, Northern Vulcan_.

welbescêawod _discreet, considerate_.

welboren _well-born, of good family, noble_.

welcn = wolcen

weld¯æd f. _good deed, benefit, kindness_.

weldêd = weld¯æd

weldôend [CP] = weldônd pres. ptc. of weldôn.

weldôn anv. _to do well_, CP: _benefit, satisfy, please_, MtL 15^15.

weldônd m. _benefactor_, #Gl#.

weldônnes f. _well-doing, kindness_, DR 13^17.

weleg = (1) wilig; (2) welig  [[(1) form of "wiliga"]]

welena gp. of wela.

weler (eo) mf. _lip_, Æ, CP.

weleðig _rich_, ANS 128^299.

welfremming f. _good deed, benefit_, DR 187^17.

welfremnes f. _benefit_, DR.

welg I. m. = wilig. II. adj. = welig  [[I. form of "wiliga"]]

welga = weliga wm. of welig adj.

welgâ interj. _hail!_

welgeboren = welboren

wel-gecwême, -gecwêmedlic _well-pleasing, acceptable_, #SPs#.

welgecwêmnes f. _favour_, DR.

welgedôn _well-done, good, beneficent_, CP.

welgehw¯ær = welhw¯ær

welgelîcian _to please well_: _be well pleased_.

welgelîcwirðe _well pleased, acceptable_, #VPs# 118^108.

welgelîcwirðnes f. _good pleasure_, #VPs# 140^7.

welgespring = welspring

welgestemned _having a good voice_, ANS 84·6.

welgetýd _well-instructed_, ES 39·354.

welgewende _thriving_, MF (Vesp. D xiv)

welgewlite _beautiful_.

welgewlitegod _well-adorned_.

welgian = weligian

welh¯æwen _well-hued, beautifully coloured_, CP 411^28.

welhrêowlîce = wælhrêowlîce  [[form of "wælhrêow"]]

welhwâ pron. _each, every_.

±welhw¯ær adv. _(nearly) everywhere_.

±welhwilc (e, y) pron. _each, any, nearly every_.

welig I. _well-to-do, rich, prosperous_, Æ, AO, CP. II. m. '_willow_.'

±weligian _to be prosperous, abound_: _enrich_, _Æ_. [v. '_awelgien_']

weligstedende (woegl-) _making rich_, DR 98^9.

well = (1) will; (2) wel

wella = wiella  [[under "wiell"]]

wellâ = wâ lâ

welle = wille

wellende (#VPs#) = willende pres. ptc. of willan.

wellere _bosom, fold, hollow_, WW.

wellibbende (y^2) _living well, well conducted, reputable_, CP.

wellîcian _to please well_, MFH 178.

wellîcung f. _agreeableness_, #EPs#.

wellîcwyrðe (u^3) _well-pleasing_, #BCPs# 146^10.

wellyrge (#Gl#) = wellere

welm = wielm

-welm v. fôt-w.

Wêlond = Wêland

welor = weler

welp = hwelp

welrêab (Ep, Erf 642) = wælrêaf

welrûmlîce adv. _graciously_, DR.

welrûmmôd _gracious_, DR 12^20.

wel-spring, -sprynge (CP) = wyll(ge)spring
  [[redirected to "wilspring"]]

welstincende _fragrant_, CP 439^33.

welswêgende _melodious_, #SPs# 150^5.

welt, welð = wielt, wielð pres. 3 sg. of wealdan, weallan.

welðungen ¶ _honoured, in high repute_.

weluc = weoloc

welung f. _revolution_, OEG 28^30. [wielwan]

welweorðe _of high esteem_, #Lcd# 3·432^29.

welwilled- = welwillend-

welwillende _well-wishing, benevolent, kindly, good_, Æ, CP.

welwillendlîce _benevolently, lovingly, kindly_.

wel-wille(n)dnes, -wilnes f. _benevolence, goodwill, kindness_, Æ.

wel-wyll-, -wylle(n)d- = welwillend-

welwyrcend m. _well-doer_.

welwyrcende _well-doing_.

wem = wamm

wêman _to sound, be heard_, #An# 740: _announce_, #An# 1480: (±)
_persuade, convince, lead astray_.

wêmend m. _herald, declarer_, #El# 880.

wêmere m. _procurer_, WW 171^28.

±wemman (æ) _to defile, besmirch, calumniate, profane, injure,
ill-treat_, _Lk_; Æ, CP: _abuse, revile_. [wamm; v. '_awem_']

+wemmednes f. _defilement_, Æ.

±wemmend m. _adulterer, fornicator_, OEG.

+wemmendlic _seducing, corrupting_, OEG 2912.

±wemming m. _defilement, blemishing, spoiling_, OEG: (+) _profanation_.

+wemmodlîce (æ) adv. _corruptly_.

wemnes = wemmednes

wen = (1) wynn; (2) wenn

wên I. f. _belief, hope, opinion, expectation, supposition_, CP:
_probability_. w. is ðæt _perhaps_: _name of the rune for =w=_.
II. = wægn

+wên _to bend, twist_, NC 297 (A 14·139).

wêna m. _hope, opinion, expectation, idea, fancy_, CP.

±wênan (w. g. or a.) _to 'ween,' fancy, imagine, believe, think, expect,
hope, fear_, Æ, AO, CP: _wonder_, ES 37·191.

wenbýl m. _boil, carbuncle_, #Lcd#.

wencel I. (i) n. _child_: _maid-servant_. II. = wancol

wend m. _what turns up, an event_.

+wend n. _snail-shell, snail_, WW. [windan]

±wendan _to turn, direct_, Æ, CP: _'wend' one's way, go_, Æ, AO:
_return_: _change, alter, vary, restore_, Æ: _convert_: _translate_, CP.
[windan]

wênde pret. 3 sg. of wênan.

Wendels¯æ mf. _Mediterranean Sea_, AO.

-wenden v. ed-w.

wendend m. _that which turns round_, WW 489^12.

wendende _movable, revolving_, #Sc# 97^4.

wendere m. _translator, interpreter_, OEG 5259.

Wendle mp. _Vandals_.

wendung f. _change, turning, rotation_, CP.

+wene _perhaps_, MkR 14^2 (oe).

wênendlic _to be hoped for_, GD 269^14.

wênere = wægnere

wênes = w¯ænes

wênestu = wênstu

weng = wang

±wenge n. _cheek_, Æ. [wang]

wenian _to accustom, habituate, inure, train_, Æ, CP: _entertain,
treat_. w. mid wynnum _treat kindly_. w. tô wiste _feast, entertain_:
_break off_, _'wean' from_.

wêninga = wênunga

wenlic _comely, beautiful_, Æ: '_conveniens_,' MkL.

wenn I. mf. _'wen,' tumour_. II. (K) = wynn

wennan = wenian

wenncîcen n. _little wen_, ZDA 31·46.

wennsealf (wen-) f. _wen-salve, ointment for a tumour_, #Lcd#.

wenspryng m. _'nævus,' mole_, WW 451^19.

wênstu = wênst ðu pres. 2 sing. of wênan.

wensum = wynsum

went pres. 3 sg. of wendan.

Wentas, Wente, Went-Sæte, -Sætas mp. _people of Gwent_ (roughly =
Monmouthshire).

wênð pres. 3 sing. of wênan.

wênung f. _expectation, hope_, AO 112^12: _doubt_.

wên-unga, -unge (¯æ) adv. _possibly, perhaps, by chance_, Æ.

wenwyrt f. _crowfoot_? _lesser celandine_? _darnel_? #Lcd#.

wêo (#Rd# 57^5) = wôh? or wêa?

wêobed, wêobud = wêofod

weoce I. f. _'wick' (of a lamp or candle)_. II. = wuce

wêocs = wêox pret. 3 sg. of weaxan.

wêocson pret. pl. of wacsan (= wascan).

wêocsteall (ES 11·64) = wêohsteall

weocu = wucu

wêod n. _herb, grass_, CP: '_weed_.'

weodewe = wuduwe

wêodhôc m. _weed-hook, hoe_, LL 455[15].

wêodian _to weed_, LL 454[9].

wêodmônað m. _August_.

weodo, weodu == wudu

weoduma = weotoma  [[under "wituma"]]

wêodung f. _weeding_, WW 105^3.

weofan (#VPs#) = wefan

wêofed = wêofod

wêofod nm. _altar_, Æ, CP. [wîg; bêod]

wêofodbôt f. _fine for injuring a priest, which was applied in support
of the altar_, v. LL 2·276.

wêofodheorð (wîbed-) m. _altar-hearth_, GD.

wêofodhrægl (wîgbed-) n. _altar-cover_, BH 90^2.

wêofod-scêat (Æ), -scêata m. _altar cloth_.

wêofodsteall m. _place of the altar_, LL (254n).

wêofod-ðegn, -ðên m. _altar-attendant, priest_.

wêofodðênung f. _altar-service_, LL 380[2].

wêofodwiglere (wîgbed-) m. _soothsayer_, WW 108^10.

+weofu pl. of +wef.

wêofud = wêofod

weofung f. _weaving_, WW 490^38.

wêog = wîg

weogas = wegas nap. of weg.

wêoh == wîg

wêohse = wêox pret. 3 sg. of weaxan.

wêohsteall m. _place of the altar, sanctuary, choir_, LL.

weol = weoll

weol- (A) = wel-

weolc I. pret. 3 sg. of wealcan. II. = weoloc

weolcn = wolcen

weolc-rêad, weolcen- = weolocrêad

weolctælg m. _purple dye_, WW. [telg]

weold pret. 3 sg. of wealdan.

weoll pret. 3 sg. of weallan.

weolm = wielm

weolme (= ea) f. _choice, pick of one's fellow-creatures_, #Cr# 445.

weoloc (e, i, y) m. _'whelk,' cockle, murex_: _(purple) dye from the
murex_.

weolocbasu _purple_, #Gl#.

weolocbasuh¯æwen _purple-coloured_.

weolocrêad _shell-fish red, scarlet, purple_.

weolocscyll (e^3) f. _whelk, cockle, shell-fish_.

weolt pret. 3 sg. of wealtan.

weonung = wining

wêop pret. 3 sg. of wêpan.

wêop- = wêp-

weor = wer I.

weorad = werod

weorc (e, o) n. _'work,' labour, action, deed_, CP: _exercise_: (¶)
_affliction, suffering, pain, trouble, distress_ (v. JAW 52). weorcum
_with difficulty_: _fortification_.

+weorc n. _work, workmanship, labour, construction_: _structure,
edifice_, Æ: _military work, fortification_.

weorcan = wyrcan

weorccræft m. _mechanics_, OEG 55^6.

weorcd¯æd (oe^1, ê^2) f. _action, operation_, DR 125^18.

weorcdæg m. _work-day_.

weorce I. ¶ adj. _painful, bitter, difficult hard_. II. adv. _hardly,
with difficulty_.

weorcern n. _workshop_.

weorcful _active_, #Sc# 169^1.

weorcgerêfa m. _foreman, overseer_, Æ.

-weorcheard, -weorclic v. un-w.

weorchûs (e) n. _workshop_, WW.

weorcmann (e) m. _workman_.

weorcnes (y) f. _working, operation_.

weorcnýten n. _working cattle_, LL 26n.

weorcr¯æden f. _corvée-work_, EC 377^1.

weorcsige m. _success in work_, #Lcd# 1·3886^15 (v. A 31·58).

weorcstân m. _hewn stone_, Æ.

weorcsum _painful_, #Gen# 594.

weorcðêow mf. _servant, slave_.

weorc-uhta? m., -uhte? n. _hour of matins on a non-festival day_, NC 332
(cp. mæsseuhta).

weorcum v. weorc.

weorcwyrðe _fit for work, able-bodied_, MF 178.

weord = wyrd

weordungdæg (WW 206^32) = weorðungdæg

weored = werod I.

weoreld = woruld

weoren pp. of weosan.

weorf n. _beast of burden_ (v. CC 129), _cattle_.

weorf- = hweorf-

weorfemeoluc? f. _milk from wild cattle_? #Lcd# 102a (MS ðeorfe-).

weorftord (-oruf-) m. _excrement of cattle_, #PPs# 112^6.

weorht = worht pp. of wyrcean.  [[variant of "wyrcan"]]

+weorht = +wyrht

weorian = werian

weorld (#Bl#) = woruld

weorm = wyrm

weormian = wearmian

weorn = worn

weornan = wiernan

±weornian (u) _to pine away, become weak, fade, wither, destroy_, Æ.

weorod = werod I. and II.

weorold = woruld

+weorp n. _throwing, dashing, tossing_, #An# 306: _what is thrown up_.

±weorpan (o, u, y) I. sv^3 _to throw, cast, cast down, cast away_, Æ,
AO, CP: _throw off, out, expel_: _throw upon_. w. handa on _lay hands on
(a person)_: (w. d. pers.) _charge with, accuse of_: (+) _reach by
throwing_. [_Ger._ werfen] II. = wierpan

weorpere m. _thrower, caster_, #Rd# 28^7.

weorpian _to pine away_, #ERPs# 38^12.

weorras (Cp 161#c#) = wearras, nap. of wearr.

weort == wyrt

weorteard = ortgeard

weorð I. (e, ea, i, o, u, y) n. _'worth,' value, price, purchase-money,
ransom_, AO, CP. II. (ie, o, u, y) adj. _worthy, honoured, noble,
honourable, of high rank_, CP: _valued, dear, precious_, AO, CP: _fit,
capable_. III. = worð I.

±weorðan^3 (u, y) _to become, be_ (passive auxiliary), _be done, be
made_, CP: _happen, come to pass, arise, take place_, _AO, Jn_: (+)
impers. _get on with, please, agree_, _An, AO, Chr_: _think of, occur
to_. ['_worth_,' '_i-worth_']

weorðe = weorð, wierðe

weorðere m. _worshipper_, JnL.

weorðful _worthy, honourable, honoured, glorious, good_, Æ (u).

weorðfullic (u) _worthy, honoured, honourable, distinguished_, CP. adv.
-lîce, AO.

weorðfulnes f. _dignity, honour_, AO.

weorðgeorn _desirous of honour, high-souled_.

±weorðian (o, u, y) _to esteem, honour, worship, distinguish, celebrate,
exalt, praise_, _Bo, PPs_; AO, CP: _adorn, deck_: _enrich, reward_.
['_i-wurthi_']

weorðiend (u) m. _worshipper_.

weorðig = worðig

weorðlêas (u) _worthless_, WW 130^20.

weorðlic _worthy, honourable, distinguished, exalted_, CP: _valuable_:
_fit, becoming_. adv. -lîce.

weorðlicnes f. _worthiness, honour, estimation_.

weorð-mynd, -mynt (u) fmn. _honour, dignity, glory_, AO, CP: _mark of
distinction_.

weorðnes (e, ie, o, u, y) f. _worth, estimation_: _splendour, rank,
honour_: _integrity, uprightness_.

weorðscipe (o, u) m. _worth, respect, honour, dignity, glory_, AO, CP:
_advantage, good_. ['_worship_']

weorððearfa (u^1, y^1) _poor man_, #Bk# 12.

weorðung f. _honouring, distinction, honour, glory_, CP: _celebration,
worship_: _excellence_: _ornament_.

weorðungdæg m. _day for bestowal of honours or offices, festival_,
#Bk# 23.

weorðungstôw f. _place of worship, the Tabernacle_, Æ.

weoruc = weorc

weorud = werod

weoruf = weorf

weoruld == woruld

wêos gs. and nap. of wêoh.

weos- = wes-

weosan^{1?} [S 382#n#2] _to be or become weak_.  [[from first edition]]

weosnian = wisnian

weot- = wit-

weotod = witod

wêoðel == wêðel, w¯æd(e)l

weoðerweard = wiðerweard

wêoðobân = wîðobân  [[headword spelled "wiðobân"]]

weoðobend = wudubinde I.

wêox pret. 3 sg. of weaxan.

weoxian _to cleanse_? A 9·261^262.

±wêpan^7 _to 'weep,' complain_, Æ, AO, CP: _bewail, mourn over,
deplore_, Æ.

wêpen == w¯æp(e)n

wêpende adj. _weeping_, GD 18^31.

wêpendlic _deplorable, mournful_. adv. -lîce.

wêpman = w¯æpmann

wêpn == w¯æpen

wêpned == w¯æpned

  [[Printed on one line:
  wêpn, wêpned == w¯æpen, w¯æpned]]

wêpnian = w¯æpnian

wer I. m. _man_, Æ, AO, CP: _husband_, Æ: (¶) _hero_: _creature_, B 105.
II. m. _the legal money-equivalent of a person's life, a man's legal
value_ (= wergild), LL. III. m. _'weir,' dam, fish-trap_, CP; Mdf:
_catch, draught_. [werian] IV. (or were?) _troop, band_, WW, ÆL 30·195.

wêr = w¯ær II.

weran = werian

werbêam m. _warrior_, #Ex# 486.

wer-borg, -borh m. _pledge for the payment of_ 'wergild.'

werc (#Gl, VPs#) = weorc

wercan = wyrcan

wercyn n. _human race, tribe_, #Rim# 61.

werdan = wirdan

were = wer II.

wêre (M) = w¯ære II.

were- = wer-

wered == werod

wêreg = wêrig

weregan (#KGl#) = wiergan

werf¯æhð f. _feud by which_ 'wer' _is incurred, breach of the peace_, LL.

werfan = hwierfan

werg == (1) wearg; (2) wyr(i)g

wergan (A) = (1) wiergan; (2) werian I.

wêrgan wk. ds. of wêrig.

wergeld = wergild

wergend = weriend

wêrgenga = w¯ærgenga

wergian = wiergan

±wêrgian _to weary, exhaust_, Æ, AO, CP.

wergild (æ^1, e^2, i^2, y^2) n. _compensation, value of a man's life_.
[wer I., v. LL 2·731]

wergildðêof m. _thief who might be redeemed by payment of his_
'wergild,' LL.

wergnes = weargnes

wergulu f. _crab-apple_, #Lcd# 3·34^14.

wêrgum dsmn. of wêrig.

wergyld = wergild

werhâd m. _male sex, virility, manhood_, Æ.

werhbr¯æde = weargbr¯æde

werhta = wyrhta

werhyrde m. _keeper of a fishing-weir_.

wêri = wêrig

±werian (æ) I. _to guard, keep, defend_, AO: _ward off, hinder, prevent,
forbid_: _occupy, inhabit_, #Gu# 322: _dam up_, CP 469^2. II. _to
clothe, cover over_: _put on_, _'wear,' use_.

wêrian = wêrgian

weriend m. _defender_, Æ.

werig = wyrig

wêrig _'weary,' tired, exhausted, miserable, sad_, AO, CP:
_unfortunate_. [wôr]

werigan = werian

werigcweðan = wyrgcweðan

werigend = weriend

wêrigferhð ¶ adj. _weary, cast down_.

wêrigian = wêrgian

wêrigmôd ¶ _weary, cast down_.

werignes = wyrignes

wêrignes f. _weariness_, Æ.

werilic = werlic

wêrines = wêrignes

wering f. _weir, dam_, CP 277^8.

werlâd f. _clearing or exculpation by the oaths of a number of men
according to a man's_ 'wer,' LL.

werlêas _without a husband_, LL.

werlic _male, masculine_, #ÆGr#: _manly_: _marital_. adv. -lîce, Æ.

wêrloga = w¯ærloga

werm- = wearm-

werm¯ægð ¶ f. _tribe, nation_.

wermet n. _man's treasure, stature_, WW.

wermôd m. _'wormwood,' absinthe_, Æ.

wern- = wearn-, wiern-

werna = wrenna

wer-nægl, -nægel m. (_man's nail_?), _wart_, Æ.

werod (eo^1, e^2) I. n. [nap. werodu, werod] _throng, company, band,
multitude_, Æ: _host, army, troop, legion_, Æ, AO. [wer] II. _sweet_, Æ.
III. ¶ n. _sweet drink, mead_.

werodian _to grow sweet_, #Bo# 51^4.

+werodl¯æcan (e^2) _to make sweet or pleasant_, #Sc# 196^5.

werodlêst f. _lack of fighters_, #El# 63.

werodlîce adv. _sweetly_.

werodnes f. _sweetness, pleasantness_, Æ.

werold = woruld

wêron (M) = w¯æron pret. pl. of wesan.

weroð = waroð

werp f. _recovery (from sickness)_, CP 457^16. [= wyrpe]

werpan = weorpan

werrêaf n. _civil clothing (i.e. not eccl. vestments)_, NC 332.

werrest (#Bl#) = wierrest

werscipe = wærscipe

werse = wierse  [[under "wiersa"]]

werst = wierrest

werstede m. _place of a weir_, EC 246^10.

wert (#KGl#) = wyrt

werte = wearte  [[under "weart"]]

wer-tihtle, -tyhtle f. _charge involving the penalty of_ 'wer,'
_homicide_, LL.

werð = wierð pres. 3 sg. of weorðan.

werðêod ¶ f. _folk, people, nation_.

werðnes (K) = weorðnes

werud = werod

weruld = woruld

wêrun (NG) = w¯æron

werwulf (-rew-) m. _'werwolf,' fiend_, LL.

wes (#VPs#) = wæs pret. 3 sg. of wesan.

wêsa m. _drunkard_. [wôs]

wesan anv. pres. 1 sg. eom, bêo, 2 eart, bist, 3 is, bið; pl. sindon,
sind; bêoð; pret. wæs, w¯æron; subj. pres. sîe, sý, bêo; sîn, bêon; pret.
w¯ære, w¯æren _to be_: _happen_. v. also bêon. [_Ger._ wesen]

+wesan _to strive, contend_? #Sol# 181. [cp. +wosa]

±wêsan _to soak, macerate_. [wôs]

wesand = wesend

wesc = wæsc

wêse _moist, macerated_. [wôs]

wesend (eo) m. _bison_, #Gl#.

wesendhorn m. _bison's horn_, TC 536^1.

wesendlîce '_essentialiter_,' GD 336; 337.

wesing f. '_confectio_,' '_debilitatio_,' v. OEG 1857.

wesle, weosule (#Gl#) f. '_weasel_.'

+wesnes f. _dissension_, BH 274^5.

wesp = wæps

west adv. _westwards_, _'west,' in a westerly direction_, AO.

westan, westane adv. _from the west_, AO. be westan (prep. w. d.)
_west of_.

±wêstan _to lay waste, ravage, devastate_, AO. [_Ger._ wüsten]

westanhealf f. _west side_.

westannorðan _northwest (wind)_, OEG.

westansûðan _southwest_, AO.

westansûðanwind m. _southwest wind_, #CVPs# 77^26.

westanwind m. _west wind_, AO 17^15.

West-Centingas mp. _people of West Kent_, #Chr# 999.

westd¯æl m. _west quarter, western part_, Æ, AO.

West-Dene mp. _West Danes_, B.

wêste _waste, barren, desolate, deserted, uninhabited, empty_, Æ, AO.

westem (#VPs#) = wæstm

westema v. westerne.

wêsten I. nmf. _waste, wilderness, desert_, Æ, AO, CP. II. adj. _waste,
desolate_, Æ.

westende m. _west end_, AO.

wêstengryre m. _terror of the desert_, #Ex# 117.

wêstensetla m. _hermit, anchorite_, Æ.

wêstenstaðol m. _waste place_, #Ruin# 28.

westenwind = westanwind

wêstern = wêsten

westerne _western, westerly_; wester(r)a _more westerly_; westema,
westmest (AO) _most westerly_.

westeweard = westweard

westhealf f. _west side_, Æ.

wêstig (oe) _waste, deserted, desert_, NG.

westlang adv. _extending westwards_, KC.

westm (#VPs#) == wæstm

westmearc f. _western boundary_, OET 484.

westmest v. westerne.

wêstnes f. _desolation_: _desert place_, #EPs# 77^19.

westnorðlang adv. _extending north-westwards_, AO 22^17.

westnorðwind m. _north-west wind_, WW.

westra = westerra; v. westerne.

westrîce n. _western kingdom_, AO.

westrihte (y^2) adv. _due west, westwards_, AO.

westrodor m. _western_ (= _evening_) _sky_.

west-S¯æ f. _western sea_.

West-Seaxe, -Seaxan mp. _West Saxons_: _Wessex_.

westsûðende m. _south-western extremity_, AO 8^23.

westsûðwind m. _south-west wind_, WW.

westu = wes ðu 2 pers. imperat. of wesan.

West-Wêalas mp. _Cornishmen_, #Chr#.

west-weard, -werd adv. _westwards, towards the west_, Æ.

westweg m. _western way_, #PPs# 74^6.

westwind m. _west wind_, BH 458^17.

wesule = wesle

wêt I. pres. 3 sg. of wêdan. II. adj. = w¯æt

wet- = wæt-

wêt- = w¯æt-

wetêdre = wæter¯ædre

+wetfæstan = +wedfæstan

wetma = weotoma  [[under "wituma"]]

weðan _to assuage, make calm_, #PPs# 106^28.

wêðe _sweet, mild, pleasant_ (A).

weðel _swathe, bandage_, WW 22^14.

wêðel = wêðl, w¯ædl

wêðelnes = w¯ædelnes

weðer I. m. _wether sheep, ram_, Æ. II. = weder I.

weðercynn n. _the wether or male kind_.

weðerwynde = wiðewinde

wêðl == w¯ædl

±wêðnes f. _suavity, mildness_.

wex (#VPs#) == weax

wexe = weax

wêxon = wêoxon pret. pl. of weaxan.

wh- = hw-

wî I. = wîg. II. (K) = weg

wiaht (K) = wiht

wiarald, _wiaruld_ (K) = woruld

wibba m. _crawling thing, beetle_, WW 121^25.

wîbed (#VPs#) = wêofod

wiber = wifer

wibil (#Gl#) = wifel

wîbora = wîgbora

wîc nf. _dwelling-place, lodging, habitation, house, mansion_, CP:
_village, town_: in pl. _entrenchments, camp, castle, fortress_:
_street, lane_: _bay, creek_. ['_wick_'; v. Mdf]

wic- = wuc-

±wîcan^1 _to yield, give way, fall down_.

wîcbora = wîgbora

wicca I. m. _wizard, magician, soothsayer, astrologer_, Æ. II. = wicga

wicce (y) f. '_witch_,' Æ.

wiccecræft m. _witchcraft, magic_, Æ.

wiccedôm m. _witchcraft_, #Bk# 20; HL 11^123.

wiccian _to use witchcraft_, LL.

wiccliende ptc. _tottering_, #Gl#.

wiccræft (#Cra# 70) = wiccecræft? or wicgcræft (_skill with
horses_)? (BT).

wiccung f. _enchantment_.

wiccung-cræft, -dôm m. _witchcraft_.

wicdæg = wucdæg

wice I. mf. _'wych'-elm_. II. = wuce. III. = weoce

wîce f. _office_, Æ: _officer_, #Chr# 1120.

wîceard m. _dwelling-place_, #Gu# 907.

wîceng = wîcing

wicfreoðu f. _protection of a dwelling_, #GnE# 129.

wicg (y) n. _horse, steed_ (very rare in prose).

wicga m. _insect, beetle_.

wîcgefêra (#Chr# 897#a#) = wîcgerêfa

wîcgerêfa m. _bailiff, reeve of a_ 'wîc' _or vill_, #Chr# 897#bcd#:
_'publicanus,' tax-gatherer_.

wicgung = wiccung

wîcherpað m. _a public road to a_ 'wîc' (BT), KC 3·418^26.

±wîcian _to dwell, lodge, rest in_, Æ, AO: _encamp, bivouac_, CP:
_harbour, anchor_, AO. [wîc]

wîcing m. _pirate, viking_, AO.

wîcingsceaðe? f. _piracy_, #Gl#.

wîcnera, wîcnere (Æ) m. _steward, bailiff_.

wîcnian _to attend upon_, Æ, RB 127^3.

wîcscêawere m. _provider of a home_, #Bl# 163^12.

wîcsteall m. _camping-place_, #Ex# 92.

wîcstede ¶ m. _dwelling_.

wîcstôw f. _dwelling-place, residence_: _camp, encampment_, Æ, AO.

wîctûn m. _vestibule, court_, #PPs#.

wicðên == wucðegn

wicu == wucu

wid = wið

wîd _'wide,' vast, broad, long_, Æ, AO, CP. w. and sîd _far and wide_.
tô wîdan ealdre, tô wîdan fêore, wîdan fyrhð _for ever_.

wîdan adv. _from far_ (v. also wîd).

wîdbrâd _wide-spreading_, #Gen# 643.

wîdcûð adj. _widely known, celebrated_, Æ.

wîde adv. _widely, afar, far and wide_, Æ, AO, CP. sîde and w. _far and
wide_.

wîdefeorh ¶ = wîdeferhð

wîdefeorlic (wîder-) _eternal_, WW 117^21.

wîde-ferhð ¶, -fyrhð I. mn. _(long life), long duration, long time_. II.
adv. _always_.

wider- = wiðer-

+wi-der pl. -dru n. _weather (good or bad)_, _storm, tempest_, AO.
[weder]

+widerian (impers.) _to be fine weather_, LL 454[12].

widewe = wuduwe

wîdfæðme ¶ _ample, extensive_.

wîdfarend m. _wanderer_, CP 315^4.

wîdfeorh = wîdeferhð

wîdfêrende ¶ _coming from afar_.

wîdferhð = wîdeferhð

wîdfloga ¶ m. _wide-flier (of a dragon)_.

wîdfolc ¶ n. _great nation_.

wîdgal == wîdgil

wîdgangol _wandering, roving_, CP.

wîdgenge _wandering (monk)_, OEG 58^10.

wîd-gil, -gill (e, ie) _wide-spread, broad, extensive_, Æ, CP:
_wandering_, GD.

wîdgilnes f. _amplitude, spaciousness_, Æ.

wîdgongel = wîdgangol

wîdgyl = wîdgil

wîdhergan _to extol_, CP 439^34.

wîdian _to become wider_, GD 315.

wîdl mn.? _impurity, filth, defilement_.

wîdland ¶ n. _extensive country_.

wîdlâst ¶ I. _far-wandering_. II. m. _long wandering, long way or road_.

±wîdlian _to defile, pollute, profane_.

wîdm¯ære _far-famed, celebrated, well-known_, AO, CP.

±wîdm¯ærsian (tr., intr.) _to spread abroad, divulge_, Æ: _celebrate_.

wîdm¯ærsung f. _proclamation, publication_? #Sc# 96^11.

wîdmêrsian = wîdm¯ærsian

wîdobân = wiðobân

widor = weder

widor- = wider-

wîdor comp. of wîd.

wîdrynig _far-flowing_, #An# 1509.

wîds¯æ mf. _open sea, ocean_, Æ, AO.

wîdsceop adj. _far extended, widely distributed_, #Pa# 8.

wîdscofen _scattered far and wide_, B 936.

wîdscrîðol _erratic_.

wîðsîð ¶ m. _long journey_: _traveller in many countries_.

wîdðil (DR 98^12) = wîdl

widu == wudu

widuw-, widw- = wuduw-

wîdwegas ¶ mp. _distant regions_.

wîebed = wêofod

wiebel = wifel

wiece = wuce

Wieht = Wiht

wîel = wealh

wielde _powerful, victorious_, AO 156^22.

+wieldend (y) _subduer_, GPH 391.

wielede pret. 3 sg. of wielwan.

wîelen (î, ý) f. _foreign woman, female slave_, AO.

wîelincel n. _little servant, slave_, GPH 401.

wîelisc (¯æ, ê, êa, î, ý) _foreign_: '_Welsh_': _not free, servile_.
[wealh]

wiell, wiella m., wielle (AO) f. (e, i, y) _'well,' fountain, spring_,
Mdf. [weallan]

wielle = wille pres. 3 sg. of willan.

wielm (a, æ, e, eo, i, y) m. _boiling, swelling, surf, billow, current,
stream_: _burning, flame, inflammation_: _fervour, ardour, zeal_, CP.
[weallan]

wielmfýr (æ) n. _blazing fire_, #Cr# 932.

wielmhât (y) _burning hot_, #Gen# 2584.

wieln- = wiln-

wielt I. pres. 3 sg. of wealdan. II. = wielð

wielð pres. 3 sg. of weallan.

wielwan (y) _to roll_.

wien- = win-

wieoldon = weoldon pret. pl. of wealdan.

±wierdan (e, i, y) _to spoil, injure, destroy_.

wiergan (æ, e, i, iri, yri, y) _to abuse, outlaw, condemn, curse,
proscribe_, CP: _do evil_. [For compounds v. wyrg-, wyrig-] [wearg]

wiergen f. (gs. wiergenne) _she-wolf_.

wiernan (e, i, y) (w. g. of thing and d. of pers.) _to withhold, be
sparing of, deny, refuse, reject, decline_, AO, CP: _forbid, prevent
from_. [wearn]

wiernung (æ) f. _refusal_, LL 152[3].

wierp m. _cast, throw, shot, blow_, AO.

±wierpan (æ, y) _to recover from illness, get better_, CP.

wierpð pres. 3 sg. of weorpan.

wierrest (superl. of yfel) '_worst_,' CP.

wiers (y) adv. '_worse_,' CP.

wiersa m., wierse fn. (comp. of yfel) '_worse_,' CP. [For comps.
v. wyrs-]

wiersian (y) _to get worse_, Æ.

wierslic (y) _bad, vile, mean_.

wierst = wierrest

wierð pres. 3 sg. of weorðan.

wierðe (i, u, y) = weorð II.

wîese = wîse pl. of wîs.

wieste = wiste, v. witan.

wiet- = wit-

wîet- = wît-

  [[Printed on one line:
  wiet-, wîet- = wit-, wît-]]

wiexð pres. 3 sg. of weaxan.

wîf n. _woman, female_, Æ, AO, CP: _'wife,' lady_, Æ, AO, CP.

+wif I. n. _fate, fortune_. [wefan] II. n. _a disease of the eye_, #Lcd#
3·292^2.

wîfcild n. _female child_, BH 76^9.

wîfcynn n. _womankind, female sex_.

wîfcýððu f. _company of a woman_? _intercourse with a woman_? #Chr#
755#a#.

+wife = +wif

wifel I. m. _'weevil,' beetle_. II. = wifer

wifer _missile, arrow, dart_, v. OEG 1103.

wîfêrend (#KGl#) = wegfêrend

wîffæst _bound to a wife, married_, LL 348[54].

wîffex n. _woman's hair_, WW. [feax]

wîffrêond m. _female friend_.

wîfgâl _licentious, unchaste_, CP 453^30.

wîfgehrine m. _contact with women_.

wîfgemædla m. _woman's talk_, #Lcd# 122b.

wîfgemâna m. _intercourse with a woman_, #Lcd# 1·336.

wîfgeornes f. _adultery_, MtL 15^19.

wîfgifta fp. _dowry, outfit_? _marriage_? #Jul# 38.

wîfhâd m. _womanhood_, Æ: _female sex_, Æ.

wîfhand f. _female inheritor, female side_, Ct.

wîfhealf f. _woman's (i.e. mother's) side_.

wîfhearpe f. _timbrel_, #CPs# 150^4.

wîfhîred n. _nunnery_, GD 27^8.

±wîfian _to take a wife, marry (of the man)_, _Æ_. ['_wive_';
'_i-wive_']

wîflâc n. _cohabitation, fornication_, LL.

wîflêas _unmarried_, LL (190^3).

wiflêast f. _lack of women_, ÆL 10^216.

wîflic _womanly, feminine, female_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

wîflufu ¶ f. _love for a woman_.

wîfmann (o^2) m. '_woman_,' Æ, AO, CP: _female servant_.

wîfmyne m. _love for a woman_, #Gen# 1861.

-wifre v. gange-w.

+wifs¯ælig _fortunate_, WW 496^8.

wîfscrûd n. _woman's clothing_, ÆP 142; TC 530.

wift = weft

wîfðegn m. _procurer_, WW.

wîfðing n. _marriage, cohabitation_.

wîfung f. (+) _marrying (of the man)_, _wedlock_, Æ: (pl.) _wives_.

wîg I. n. _strife, contest, war, battle_, Æ, AO, CP: _valour_: _military
force, army_, Æ. II. (wîh, wêoh) ¶ n. _idol, image_.

wiga m. _warrior, fighter_: _man_.

wîgan^1 _to fight, make war_, Æ.

wîgâr m. _spear, lance_. [wîg, gâr]

wîgb¯ære _warlike_, WW 193^18.

wîgbealu n. _war-bale_, B 2046.

wîgbed == wêofod

wîgbill n. _sword_, B 1607.

wîgblâc _bravely caparisoned_, #Ex# 204.

wîgblêd? m. _luck in war_, #Rim# 26 (wilbec).

wîgbora m. _fighter_, #ÆGr# 27^16.

wîgbord ¶ n. _shield_.

wîgcræft m. _war-power, art of war_, AO.

wîgcræftig _strong in battle_, B 1811.

wîgcyng = wîcing

wîgcyrm m. _noise of battle_, #Gen# 1990.

wîgelung = wîglung  [[headword spelled "wiglung"]]

wîgend ¶ m. _warrior, fighter_.

wîgende _fighting_, Æ.

wîgfreca ¶ m. _warrior_.

wîgfruma ¶ m. _war-chief_.

wigg = (1) wîg I.; (2) wicg

wigga = wicga

wîggebed = wêofod

wiggend = wîgend

wîggetâwe fp. _war-gear_, B 368. [wîg, geatwe]

wîggild (wîh-) n. _idol_.

wîggryre m. _war-terror_, B 1284.

wîghaga ¶ m. _war-hedge, phalanx_.

wîgheafola m. _helmet_, B 2661.

wîghêap m. _troop of warriors_, B 477.

wîgheard _brave in battle_.

wîghete m. _hostility_, B 2121.

wîghryre m. _slaughter, defeat_, B 1619.

wîghûs n. _battlement, tower_, AO, CP: _turret (on an elephant's back)_,
ÆL 25^560.

wîghyrst f. _war-gear, accoutrements_, #Ruin# 35.

wîgian _to fight_, LL 132[6,5].

wigle n. _divination_, OEG.

wîglêoð n. _war-cry, battle-signal_, #Ex# 221.

wiglere m. _soothsayer, wizard_, Æ.

wiglian _to take auspices, divine_, Æ.

wîglic _warlike_. adv. -lîce.

±wiglung f. _soothsaying, augury, witchcraft, sorcery_, Æ.

wîgmann m. _warrior_, LL, W.

wîgnoð m. _warfare, war_, WW 442^1?

wigol _divining, foreboding_, WW 133^2.

wîgplega ¶ m. _war-play, battle_.

wîgrâd (ô) f. _war-path_, #Gen# 2084.

wîgr¯æden f. _state of war, battle_, #Wald# 1^22.

wîgsigor ¶ m. _victory in battle_.

wîgsîð m. _military expedition_, #Gen# 2094.

wîgsmið I. m. _maker of idols_, #PPs# 113^12. II. ¶ m. _warrior_.

wîgspêd ¶ f. _success in war_.

wîgspere n. _war-spear, dart_, WW 143^14.

wîgsteall n. _rampart, entrenchment_.

wîgstrang _mighty in war_, WW 360^36.

wîgtrod n. _path of an army_, #Ex# 491.

wîgðracu ¶ f. _onslaught in battle, attack_.

wîgðrîst _bold in battle_, #Jul# 432.

wîgur = wîgâr

wîgwægn m. _war chariot_, AO.

wîgw¯æpen n. _weapon of war_, W 170^8.

wîgweorðung ¶ (êoh^1) f. _idol-worship, idolatry_.

wîh = wîg

wîhaga = wîghaga

wihst pres. 2 sg. of weaxan.

wiht I. (u, y) fn. _'wight,' person, creature, being_: _'whit,' thing,
something, anything_. II. adv. _at all_. ne w., n¯ænig w. _not at all_.
nân w. _no whit_. III. n. '_weight_.'

Wiht f. _Isle of Wight_, #Chr# [_L._ Vectis]

wihte adv. (d. instr. of wiht) _at all_.

+wihte n. '_weight_.'

wihtga = wîtega

Wihtland n. _Isle of Wight_, Æ.

wihtmearc f. _plumb-line_, OEG 3005.

Wiht-s¯ætan, -s¯æte mp. _inhabitants of the Isle of Wight_.

Wihtware mp. _inhabitants of the Isle of Wight_.

wîhûs = wîghûs

wil = wiell

wîl n. _'wile,' trick_, #Chr# 1128.

wil- = will-

wila (y) '_catenarum_,' v. OEG 3560n and 7^257.

wîlamcel? (wîluncel? GPH 401) = wîelincel

wîlâwei = wâ lâ wâ

wîlbec m. _stream of tears, lamentations_? #Rim# 26. [or? wîgblêd]

+wilbod n. _commandment_, WW 191^22.

wilboda m. _messenger of joy, angel_, #Gu# 1220.

+wilcð n. _rolling, tossing_, #JPs# 88^10. [wealcan]

wilcuma I. m. _welcome guest_. II. = wilcume

wilcume interj. _welcome!_

±wilcumian _to welcome, greet_, Æ.

wild? _wild_, OEG 4706n.

wildæg m. _day of joy_, #Cr# 459.

±wildan _to control, tame, subdue, conquer, seize_: (+) _compel_, LL
265[15]: (+) _temper_.

wilddêor = wildêor

wilddêoren _pertaining to wild beasts, fierce_, #Sc# 99^7.

wilddêornes f. _abode of wild beasts, desert, wilderness_.

wilde I. _'wild,' untamed, uncontrolled_, Æ, AO: _uncultivated, desert_,
AO. II. adv.

+wilde (y) _in the power of, under the control of_, Æ.

wildêar (N) = wildêor

wildefýr n. _lightning_, #Chr#: _erysipelas_, WW.

wildêor n. (occl. dp. wildrum) _wild beast_, Æ, AO: _deer, reindeer_.

wildêorlic _animal-like, savage_, CP. adv. -lîce.

wilder, wildor = wildêor

wildeswîn m. _wild boar_, ANS 129·44.

wildgôs f. _wild goose_, WW 364^1.

-wildian v. â-w.

wile pres. 3 sg. of willan.

+wile = +will

wileg = wilig  [[form of "wiliga"]]

wilege = wilige  [[under "wiliga"]]

wîlen = wîelen

wilewîse = _wiligwîse_

wilfægen _fain, glad_, Æ.

wilf¯æmne f. _beloved woman_.

wilfullîce adv. _willingly_, OEG.

wilgæst m. _welcome guest_, #Mod# 7 (e^2).

wilgedryht ¶ f. _willing band_.

wilgehlêða ¶ m. _intimate companion_. [hlôð]

wilgeofa = wilgiefa

wilgesîð ¶ m. _willing companion_.

wilgest = wilgæst

wilgestealla = willgestealla

wilgiefa ¶ (eo, i) m. _gracious giver, king_.

wilhrêmig _rejoicing in satisfied desire_, WW 376^26.

wilhrêðig _exultant_, #El# 1117.

wilia = wiliga

wilian (Æ) = wielwan

±wilian (y) _to connect, bind_, #Sc# 11^8; W.

wilie = wilige  [[under "wiliga"]]

wiliga m., wilige (Æ) f. _basket_.

wiligwîse (wile-) _basket-wise_, #Bl# 125^21.

wiliht (y) _full of willows_, Ct.

wîlisc = wîelisc

will I. n. = willa m. II. (e, y) m. _fountain, spring_, CP.

+will n. _will, wish, desire_, AO.

will- = wyll-

willa m. I. _mind, will, determination, purpose_, Æ, CP. sylfes willum
_of one's own accord_: _desire, wish, request_: _joy, delight,
pleasure_: _desirable thing, valuable_. II. (æ, e, y) _fountain,
spring_.

willan (y) anv. pres. 1, 3 sg. ind. and subj. wile, wille, wielle, pret.
wolde _to 'will,' be willing, wish, desire_, AO, CP: (denoting habit,
repetition), _to be used to_: _to be about to_: (sign of the future
tense) _shall, will_, AO, CP.

willcuma = wilcuma

wille (e, y) fm. _fountain, spring_. [weallan]

willeburne (y) ¶ f. _spring_.

willecærse f. _watercress_.

willen = wyllen

-willen v. dol-w.

wîllendlic (BH) = hwîlwendlic

willendlîce adv. _willingly_, WW.

willes adv. _willingly, voluntarily_, Æ.

willestrêam (y) ¶ m. _stream_.

willewæter (y) n. _spring water_, #Lcd#.

willfægen = wilfægen

willflôd ¶ m. _flood_.

willgebrôðor mp. _brothers_, #Gen# 971.

willgesîð = wilgesîð

willgespryg = wilspring

willge-steald, -steall n. _riches, wealth_, #Gen# 2146?

willgestealla m. _willing companion_, #Gen# 2146?

willgesweostor fp. _sisters_, #Gen# 2607.

willgeðofta § m. _pleasant companion_.

±willian _to wish, desire_.

willic (y) _from a fountain_, WW.

willîce (y) adv. _willingly, voluntarily_.

willnung = wilnung

willsele m. _pleasant dwelling_, #Ph# 213.

willsîð = wilsîð

willspell ¶ n. _good tidings_, #El#.

willsum == wilsum

willung = wilnung

willwong m. _pleasant plain_, #Ph# 89.

wilm = wielm

wîln = wîelen

+wilnes f. _desire, wish_, #LPs# 20^3.

±wilnian (w. g. or a.) _to wish, long for, desire, will_, Æ, AO, CP:
_beg for, supplicate, entreat, petition for_: _tend towards_, CP.

±wilniendlic _desirable_: _capable of desire_, ÆL 1^97.

±wilnung f. _desire, longing_, AO, CP.

wiloc = weoloc

Wil-s¯æte, -s¯ætan mp. _people of Wilts_: _Wiltshire_.

wîlsc = wîelisc

wilsîð m. _desired journey_.

wil-spring, -sprynge (e^1, y^1) m. _spring_.

wil-sum, -sumlic _desirable, delightful_: _ready, willing, voluntarily,
spontaneous_: _devoted_. adv. -lîce.

wilsumnes f. _willingness, devotion_: _vow_.

wilt I. pres. 2 sg. of willan. II. pres. 3 sg. of wealdan.

wiltîðe _having obtained one's wish, glad_, OEG 2219^3589.

wilð pres. 3 sg. of weallan.

wilðegu f. _agreeable food_, #An# 153.

wiluc- = weoloc-

wîluncel = wîelincel

wîlwendlic = hwîlwendlic

wimman, wîman = wîfmann

wimpel (win-) m. _'wimple,' covering for the neck, cloak_, #Gl#.

win == winn

wîn n. '_wine_,' Æ, CP. [_L._ vinum]

wînærn n. _tavern, cellar_, #Gl#: _drinking hall, wine hall_, B 655.

wînbælg = wînbelg

wînbêam m. _vine_, WW.

wînbeger n. _grape_, NG.

wînbelg (æ) m. _(leather) bottle for wine_.

wîn-berge, -beri(g)e f. _wine-berry, grape_.

wînbôh m. _vine-shoot, vine_, Æ.

wînbrytta m. _wine-seller, inn-keeper_, WW.

wînburg ¶ f. _festive city_: _walled vineyard, castle_.

wînbyrele m. _innkeeper_, WW 377^4.

wincan = wincian

wince f. _winch, pulley_, WW 416^6.

wincel I. m. _corner_, Ct. [_Ger._ winkel] II. = wencel

wincettan _to wink_, #PPs# 34^19.

wincian _to 'wink,' blink_, Æ, CP.

winclo = wenclu, nap. of wencel.

wînclyster n. _cluster of grapes_, OEG 18#b#^2.

wîncolc _wine vat_, WW 439^30.

wîncynn n. _wine_, NC 333.

wind m. '_wind_,' Æ, AO, CP.

+wind n. _winding thing, winding path_, WW.

windæddre f. _windpipe_, WW.

±windæg ¶ m. _day of strife or toil_.

±windan^3 (tr.) _to 'wind,' plait, curl, twist_: _whirl, brandish,
swing_: (intr.) _turn, fly, leap, start, roll, slip, go_, Æ, AO, CP:
_delay, hesitate_, #Gu# 265.

windb¯ære (ê^2) _windy_, OEG 43^10.

windbland (o^2) n. _blast of wind_, B 3146.

+winde _blowing_, BH 202^7.

-winde v. ed-, næddre-, wudu-w.

windecræft = wyndecræft

windel m., gs. windles _basket_, Æ.

windelocc m. _curly lock_, WW.

windelstân m. _tower with a winding staircase_, (BT), WW 145^17.

windelstrêaw n. '_windle-straw_,' WW.

windeltrêow n. _oleaster, willow_, WW.

wind-fona, -gefon m. _winnowing fan_.

windfylled _blown down_, LL 452[19].

windgereste f. _resting-place of the winds_, B 2456?

windhlæden (a^2) _windy_.

windig _windy, breezy_, Æ.

windiht (GPH) = wundiht

windil = windel

windiuscoful = windscofl

windles v. windel.

windong _something woven, hurdle_.

windr¯æs m. _storm of wind_, MkL 4^37.

wîndrenc (i, y) m. _wine-drink, wine_, Æ.

wîndruncen _elate, intoxicated with wine_.

windscofl _fan_, WW 478^25.

windsele m. ¶ _(windy hall), hall of misery, hell_.

windswingel f. _(wind-whip), fan_, WW 154^10.

windum¯ær (wudu- ?) f. _echo_, WW 474^8.

windung f. _winnowing, chaff, tares, straw_, NG.

windwian wv. _to fan, 'winnow.'_ [wind]

windwig = windig

windwigceaf n. _chaff_, OEG 2439.

windwigsyfe n. _winnowing-sieve, fan_, WW 141^11.

wine ¶ m. [occl. gp. winig(e)a] _friend, protector, lord_. [wynn]

wîneard == wîngeard

wine-dryhten (i^3) ¶ m., gen. -dryhtnes _friendly lord, lord and
friend_.

wînegeard = wîngeard

winegêomor _mourning for friends_, B 2239.

winelêas ¶ _friendless_.

winem¯æg ¶ m. _dear kinsman_.

wînern = wînærn

winescipe m. _friendship_.

winestre = winstre

winetrêow f. _conjugal fidelity_, #Hu# 50.

wineðearfende ¶ _friendless_.

winewincle f. _periwinkle (shell-fish)_.

wînfæt n. _wine-vessel, wine-vat_, WW.

+win-ful, -fullic _laborious, tedious, hard_, BH, GD. adv. -lîce.

wîngâl ¶ _flushed or intoxicated with wine_.

wîngeard m. _vineyard_: _vine_.

wîngeardbôg m. _vine-tendril_, WW 118^3.

wîngeardhôc m. _vine-tendril_, WW 201^31.

wîngeardhring m. _cluster of grapes or other fruit_, WW 213^17.

wîngeardseax n. _(vine-) pruning knife_, WW 234^44.

wîngeardwealh (wîneard-) m. _worker in a vineyard_, NC 333.

wîngedrinc n. (¶) _wine-drinking, drinking bout_: _wine_, WW.

wîngerd = wîngeard

wîngetredde = wîntredde

wîngyrd = wîngeard

wînhâte f. _invitation to wine_, #Jud# 8.

wînhrêafetian _to gather grapes_, #LPs# 79^13.

wînhûs n. _wine-house, tavern_.

winiga, winigea v. wine.

wining (eo, y) m. _leg-band, garter_.

wînland n. _wine-growing country_, NC 333.

wînlêaf n. _vine-leaf_, OEG 18#b#^73.

wînlic _vinous, like wine_, Æ.

wînmere m. _wine-vat_, WW 439^30.

±winn n. _toil, labour, trouble, hardship_, _BH, Lk_: _profit, gain_,
#PPs#: _conflict, strife, war_, _Bo_; AO. ['_i-win_']

±winna m. _enemy, adversary_, Æ, CP.

winnan^3 (y) _to labour, toil, trouble oneself_: _resist, oppose,
contradict_: _fight, strive, struggle, rage_, _Bl_. on w. _attack_: (+)
_conquer, obtain, gain_, _Chr, Met_: _endure, bear, suffer_. ['_win_';
'_i-win_']

+winnesful = +winful

±winnstow f. _wrestling place_.

winnung = windung

winpel = wimpel

wînreced ¶ n. _wine-hall_.

wînreopan^5 (y) _to gather in the vintage_. [repan]

wînsæd _satiated with wine_, #Jud# 71.

wînsæl n. _wine-hall_, #Wa# 78.

wînsele ¶ n. _wine-hall_.

wînsester m. _wine-vessel_, WW 122^31. [_L._ sextarius]

winstôw = winnstôw  [[headword spelled "winnstow"]]

winstre I. adj. _left_, Æ, CP. II. f. _left hand_.

winsum == wynsum

wint pres. 3 sg. of windan.

wîntæppere m. _wine-tapster, tavern-keeper_, OEG 2652.

winter mn. [ds. wintra; nap. wintru, winter] '_winter_,' Æ, AO, CP: pl.
(in computing time) _years_, Æ, AO, CP.

winterbiter ¶ _bitterly cold_.

winterburna m. _winter-torrent_, JnL 18^1.

winterceald ¶ _wintry-cold_.

wintercearig _winter-sad, sad with years_? #Wa# 24.

winterdæg m. _winter's day_, #Bo#.

winterdûn f. _hill on which sheep were kept in winter_? LL 453[1].

winterfeorm f. _Christmas feast_, LL 452[21,4].

winterfylleð _October_.

wintergegong m. _fate_, WW 406^6.

wintergerîm ¶ n. _number of years_.

wintergetel ¶ n. _number of years_.

wintergew¯æde § n. _garment of winter, snow_.

winterge-weorp, -worp n. _winter-storm, snowstorm_, #Ph# 57.

winterhûs n. _winter-house_, ÆL 36^95.

winterig = wintrig

winterl¯æcan _to grow wintry_.

winterlic _wintry, belonging to winter, winter_, Æ.

winterr¯ædingbôc f. _lectionary for the winter_, TC 430^16.

winterrîm = wintergerîm

wintersæt = wintersetl

winterscûr m. _winter-shower_, #Ph# 18.

winterseld = wintersetl

wintersetl n. _winter-quarters_, AO, #Chr#.

wintersteal m. _stallion a year old_, LL 378[7].

winterstund f. _winter-hour, short time, year_? #Gen# 370.

wintersufel n. _food for winter_, LL 450[9].

wintertîd f. _winter-time_, Æ.

wîntîber n. _wine-offering, libation_, WW 130^13 (-tîfer).

+wintîd f. _time of affliction_, GD 210^15.

wintra v. winter.

-wintre v. ân-, twi-w., etc.

+wintred _grown up, adult_: _aged_, AO.

wîntredde f. _winepress_, OEG 2647.

wintreg = wintrig

wîntrêow n. _vine_, Æ.

wîntrêowig adj. _of the vine_, GPH 390.

wintrig _wintry_, AO.

wîntrog m. _wine-vessel_, MtL 21^33.

wîntunne f. _wine-cask_ (or? wîntûn _wine-house_), ÆP 19^1.

wîntwig n. _vine-twig_, WW.

winð pres. 3 sg. of winnan.

wînðegu ¶ f. _banquet of wine_.

wînwircend m. _vine-dresser_.

+winworuld f. _world of care_, #Gu# 829.

wînwringe f. _winepress_.

wio- = weo-, wi-, wu-

wîohbed = wêofod

wîpian _to 'wipe,' cleanse_, Æ.

wîr I. ¶ m. _'wire,' metal thread, wire-ornament_. II. (ý) m. _myrtle_,
#Gl#; Mdf.

wir- = wear-, wier-, wyr-

wîrboga m. _twisted wire_? #Rd# 15^3.

wirc- = weorc-, wyrc-

+wirdan (e, y) _to spoil, injure, destroy_: _violate, obstruct_.

wirding (oe, y) f. _bodily injury_, LL 410[3,5]: _blemish_, OEG 649.

wirdnes f. _injury, vice_, DR (oe).

+wîred _made of wire_, TC 537^34.

wirg- (Æ) = wierg-, wyr(i)g-

wirgr¯æfe? f. _myrtle-grove_, WW.

wirian = wiergan

wirig- = wierg-, wyr(i)g-

wirpð pres. 3 sg. of weorpan.

wîrtrêow n. _myrtle_, #Lcd#, WW.

wîrtrêowen (y^1, ý^2) adj. _myrtle_, #Lcd# 1·236^1

wirtruma = wyrtruma  [[under "wyrtrum"]]

wirð I. = weorð I. II. = wierð pres. 3 sg. of weorðan.

wirðe = worð I.

wîs I. adj. _'wise,' learned_, Æ, AO, CP: _prudent, discreet,
experienced_, Æ, AO, CP. II. = wîse I.

+wis == wiss

wîsa ¶ m. _leader, director_.

wisan = wesan

wîsan (#Dan# 35) = wîsian

wîsbôc f. _instructive book_? #PPs# 138^14.

wîsc- (Æ) = wýsc-

wisce n. _a piece of meadow_, PST 95/98, 542.

wischere m. _diviner_? ÆL 21^466.

wîsdôm m. _'wisdom,' knowledge, learning_: _experience_, Æ, CP.

wîse I. f. _'wise,' way, fashion, custom, habit, manner_, Æ, CP:
_testamentary disposition_: _business, affair, thing, matter_, Æ, CP:
_condition, state, circumstance_, AO, CP: _reason, cause_, Æ:
_direction_: _melody_: _idiom_. II. adv. _wisely_. III. (ý) f. _sprout,
stalk_.

wîs-fæst, -fæstlic _wise, sagacious, discreet, learned, intelligent_.

+wîsfullîce _wisely_, GD 95^31.

wîshycgende _wise, sagacious_, B 2716.

wîshýdig ¶ _wise, discreet, sagacious_.

±wîsian (w. d. or a.) _to direct, instruct, guide, lead_, Æ, CP: _point
out, show_, _Gen_. ['_i-wisse_']

wislic _certain, sure, true_. adv. (±) -lîce _certainly, truly_, _Lcd,
Lk_: _moreover_. ['_iwisliche_']

wîslic _wise, sagacious, prudent_, Æ, AO. adv. -lîce.

wisligan = wistlian  [[redirected to "hwistlian"]]

wisnian _to dry up, wither, waste away_. [weornian]

+wiss I. n. _certainty, surety_, Æ. II. adj. _certain, sure,
trustworthy_, _BH, Bo, Guth, Nic_. tô gewissan, gewissum; mid gewisse
_especially, certainly_, _RB, HL_. ['_i-wis_']

wiss- = wis-

wisse = wiste pret. 3 sg. of witan.

wîssefa m. _wise-souled man_, #Sol# 438?

wissian = wîsian

±wissian _to direct, instruct, guide_, _Æ_: _point out, show_, Æ.
['_i-wisse_']

wiss-iend, -igend m. _governor, director_: _driver (of chariot)_, Æ.

+wisslîce = +wislîce

wisste = wiste pret. 3 sg. of witan.

wissum (tô) adv. _altogether, completely_, OEG.

±wissung f. _showing, instruction, guidance_, _Æ_: _rule, regulation,
government_, Æ (in comp.). [v. '_iwisse_']

wist f. _being, existence_: _well-being, abundance, plenty_: _provision,
nourishment, subsistence, food, meal, feast, delicacy_, Æ, CP. [wesan]

wiste pret. 3 sg. of witan.

wîstfæstlic = wîsfæstlic  [[under "wîsfæst"]]

wistfulgend m. _banqueter_, #EPs# 41^5.

wistfull _productive_, #Chr# 1112.

±wistfullian _to feast_, Æ.

wistfullîce adv. _luxuriously_, WW 513^6.

wistfullnes f. _good cheer_.

±wistfullung f. _feasting_, OEG.

wistfyllo f. _fill of food_, B 734.

wistgifende _fertile_, WW 457^25.

+wistian _to feast_, G.

wistl- = hwistl-

+wistl¯æcan _to feast, banquet_, G.

wist-mete m., nap. -mettas, _sustenance_, ÆL 23b^582.

wiston pret. pl. of witan.

wisðlung = wistlung  [[redirected to "hwistlung"]]

wîswyrdan _to be wise in speech_, A 13·38.

wîswyrde _prudent in speech_, W 72^18.

wit I. pron. 1 pers. (nom. dual), gs. uncer, d. unc, acc. unc(it) _we
two_, CP. wit Æthered _Æthered and I_. II. (±) = witt

±wita (eo, ie, u) m. _sage, philosopher, wise man, adviser, councillor,
elder, senator_ (v. LL 2·737), Æ, AO: _witness_, Æ, CP: _accomplice_.
['_wit_'; witan]

±witan (eo, y) swv. pres. 1, 3 sg. wât, 2 wâst, pl. witon, subj. pres.
sg. wite, pl. wit-en, -on; pret. sg. wiste, pp. witen _to be aware of or
conscious of, know, understand_, _BH, LG_; AO, CP: _observe, perceive_.
andan w. _dislike_. incan w. (tô) _to have a grudge (against)_. ege w.
_to fear_. dôn tô witanne _to cause to know, inform_. ['_wit_';
'_i-wite_']

wîtan^1 (+) _to look, behold, see_, #PPs# 79^14: _guard, keep_, Æ:
_impute or ascribe to, accuse, reproach, blame_, AO, CP: (±) _depart,
go, go out_: _die_ (often forðgew.).

wîte n. _punishment, torture, plague, injury_, Æ, CP: penalty, fine:
_contribution, in money or food, to sustenance of king or his officers_,
LL 356[69,2]: _woe, misery, distress_.

wîtebend ¶ mf. _bonds of torture or punishment_.

wîtebrôga m. _tormenting dread_.

witedlîce = witodlîce

wîte-dôm (wîtig-) m. _prophecy, prediction, presage, oracle_.

wîtedômlic _prophetic_, #Guth#.

wîtefæst _penally enslaved_, TC.

wît-ega, -(i)ga m. _wise man_: _prophet, soothsayer_: _prophecy_.
[wîtan; _OHG._ wîzzago]

wîtegeard? m. _amphitheatre_, v. OEG 3333.

wîtegdôm (i^2) m. _prophecy, prediction_: _divination_.

wîtegestre f. _prophetess_, Æ.

±wîtegian _to prophesy, predict_, Æ, AO.

wîtegung f. _prophecy, divination_, Æ.

wîtegungbôc f. _book of prophecy_, Æ.

wîtehrægl n. _penitential garb, sackcloth_, #PPs# 68^11.

wîtehûs n. _torture-house, prison, hell_: _amphitheatre (as place of
torture and martyrdom)_, OEG.

wîtel = hwîtel

wîtelâc ¶ n. _punishment_.

wîtelêas _without punishment or fine_, LL 360[73,4].

wîtelêast f. _freedom from punishment or fine_.

wîtelic _toilsome, carking_, MFH 178: _penal_, GD 330; 332.

witelîce (GD 102^24) = witodlîce

witenagemôt n. _meeting of the wise men, national council_. [wita]

+wîtende _transitory_, MFH 165.

wîtendlic = wîtigendlic

+wîtendlic _transitory, perishable_, Æ, CP.

witendlîce = witodlîce

+wit-endnes, -ennes f. _departure, death_.

wîter¯æden f. _punishment, fine_.

+witerian _to inform_, #Kl# 17^44. [witter]

wîtern n. _prison_, WW 199^31. [ærn]

wîtescræf n. _pit of torment, hell_, #Sat# 691.

wîtesteng m. _pole used for torture_, OEG.

wîtestôw f. _place of torment or execution_.

wîteswing § m. _scourging, punishment_.

wîtetôl n. _instrument of torture_.

wîteðêow adj. _man reduced to slavery by the law_ (also sbm.).

+witfæst _of sound mind_, #Guth# 66^17.

wîtg- = wîteg-

witian (eo) _to order, arrange, provide, destine, conclude, establish_.

witiendlic = witigendlic  [[headword spelled "wîtigendlic"]]

wîtig = wittig

wîtig- = wîteg-

wît-igendlic, -t(i)endlic _prophetic_, OEG.

wîtiglic _punitive, of punishment_, GD.

wîtingstôw = wîtnungstôw

±witlêas _foolish, mad_, Æ.

witlêasnes f. _want of intelligence, folly_, OEG 47^3.

±witlêast f. _folly, madness_. [witt]

+witloca ¶ m. _mind_, ¶CP.

witmæreswyrt f. _spoonwort_? #Lcd# 12a.

wîtnere m. _tormentor, torturer_, Æ.

±witnes f. _knowledge_, _'witness,' testimony_, _Bl, Bo_: _a witness_.
['_i-witness_']

±witnian _to punish, chastise, torture, afflict_, Æ, AO, CP.

wîtnigend m. '_punitor_,' #EPSs# 78^11.

wîtnung f. _torment, torture, punishment, purgatory_, Æ.

wîtnungstôw f. _place of punishment, purgatory_, Æ.

witod I. = witodlîce. II. pp. of witian.

witodlic _certain, sure_, LkR 20^6 (wutud-); adv. -lîce _truly, for,
verily, certainly, undoubtedly, indeed, thus_, Æ, AO, CP. [witan] conj.
_but, and, for, therefore, wherefore_. [witan]

witol _knowing, wise_. [witan]

witolnes f. _wisdom_, GD 331^15.

witon I. pret. pl. of witan. II. = wuton

wîtrod = wîgtrod

+witscipe m. _testimony, evidence_.

+witsêoc _possessed, insane_, Æ.

±witt n. _understanding, intellect, sense_, _Bo, Lk_: _consciousness_.
[wit; '_i-wit_']

+witt- = +wit-

witter _wise, prudent_, #Chr# 1067#d#. [_ON._ vitr]

±wittig ¶ _wise, sagacious, skilful_: _in one's right mind_, Æ.

wittignes f. _intelligence_, OEG 78 (wytti-).

wittol = witol

wîtu nap. of wîte.

witud == witod

wituma (e, eo, y) m. _dowry_ (v. LL 2·739).

witumbora m. _bridesman, paranymph_, OEG 1774.

wîtungstôw = wîtnungstôw

wîtword n. _written evidence, will, covenant_, LL.

wið I. prep. (w. a.) _with, by, near, against, beside, at, through_:
(w. d.) _from (separation)_, _with (opposition)_, _for, in return for,
on condition of, beside, near, opposite_: (w. g.) _towards, to, at,
against_. w. êastan (1) adv. _to the east_; (2) prep. _east of_. w. ûp
_upwards, above_. w. ðân ðe _because, in consideration of, provided
that_. wið...weard prep. (w. a.) _towards_. II. conj. _until_.

wiðæftan I. adv. _from behind, behind, after_. II. prep. _behind,
at_, Æ.

wiðblâwan^7 _to blow away_, CP 439^24.

wið-bregdan^3, -brêdan^3 _to withhold, restrain, withstand, oppose_,
Æ, CP.

wiðcampian (o) _to fight against_.

wiðcêosan^2 _to reject_. pp. wiðcoren _rejected, reprobate, outcast_.

wiðcostian '_reprobare_,' NC 333.

wiðcwædenes = wiðcwedennes

wiðcwedennes f. _contradiction_.

wiðcwedolnes = wiðercwedolnes

wiðcweðan^5 _to speak against, contradict, gainsay, oppose, resist_, Æ:
_forbid, refuse, deny_: _reject, renounce_, CP.

wiðcweðenes = wiðcwedennes

wiðdrîfan^1 _to repel, drive off_, #PPs#.

wiðe- = wiðig-

wiðêadon (N) = wiðêodon pret. pl. of wiðgân.

wiðêastan _eastward, eastwards_, AO.

wiðeftan = wiðæftan

wiðer prep. and adv. _against_.

wiðerbreca (a^3, eo^3, o^3, u^3) m. _adversary_: _the devil, Satan_.

wiðerbrocian _to oppose_, #CVPs#.

wiðerbrôga m. _adversary, the devil_, #Cr# 564.

wiðerbruca = wiðerbreca

wiðercerran _to turn against, prance_. [cp. wiðercyr]

wiðercora m. _adversary, rebel, apostate, sinner_, Æ.

wiðercoren _rejected, reprobate, wicked_.

wiðercorennes f. _reprobation_, ÆH 2·290^19.

wiðercwednes f. _contradiction_, CP 143^20.

wiðercwedol _opposing, contradicting_.

wiðercwedolnes f. _contradiction_, #Gl#.

wiðercwedung f. _a speaking against, contradiction_, #SPs# 51^4.

wiðercweð- = wiðercwed-

wiðercweðan^5 _to withstand_.

wiðercwida (y) m. _contradictor_, OEG 1893: _opposer, rebel_, WW 110^23.

wiðercwide m. _contradiction_: _opposition, resistance_.

wiðercwidel- = wiðercwedol-

wiðercwyd- = wiðer-cwed-, -cwid-

wiðercyr m. _rearing (of a horse)_, #El# 926.

wiðerdûne (ê^3, y^3) _narrow_, NC 333.

-wiðere v. tô-w.

wiðerfeoht- = wiðfeoht-

wiðerflita m. _opponent, adversary_, AO, CP.

wiðerflîtan^1 _to contend against_.  [[from first edition]]

wiðerhabban _to resist_, #PPs# 72^20.

wiðerhlinian _to lean against_, #Gl#.

wiðer-hycgende, -hýdig _refractory, perverse, antagonistic, hostile_. as
sb. _rival, adversary_.

wiðerian _to resist, oppose, struggle against_, Æ: _irritate, provoke_:
_be provoked_.

wiðerl¯æcan (y^1, ê^3) _to deprive_, #EPs# 83^13.

wiðerlêan ¶ n. _requital_.

wiðerling m. _opponent, adversary_, EHy 4^7.

wiðermâl n. _counter-plea, defence_, #Chr# 1052.

wiðermêde _stiff-necked, antagonistic, perverse_.

wiðermêdnes (oe) f. _perversity_, DR: _adversity_, DR.

wiðermêdo f. _antagonism_: _perversity_: _adversity_.

wiðermetan^5 _to compare to, measure with, measure against_.

wiðermôd _unwilling, adverse, contrary_, CP 212^7.

wiðermôdnes f. _adversity_, CP 83^19.

wiðermoednes (DR) = wiðermêdnes

wiðerr¯æde _contrary, opposed, adverse, perverse, rebellious_, Æ:
_disadvantageous_: _disagreeable, unpleasant_.

wiðerr¯ædlic _contrary, adverse_, #ÆGr# 264^1.

wiðerr¯ædnes f. _opposition, discord, variance, disadvantage,
adversity_, Æ.

wiðerræhtes (= rihtes) adv. _opposite_, B 3039.

wiðerriht n. _recompense_, WW 118^12.

wiðersaca m. _adversary, enemy_, Æ: _betrayer_: _apostate_, Æ.

wiðersacian _to renounce, become apostate_, OEG: _blaspheme_.

wiðersacung f. _apostasy_: _blasphemy_.

wiðersæc I. n. _contradiction, hostility, opposition_, Æ: _apostasy_.
[sacan] II. _unfavourable_, #Lcd# 97a.

wiðerspr¯æc f. _contradiction_.

wiðerst¯æger _steep_, WW.

wiðerstandan^6 _to resist_, #EPs# 16^8.

wiðersteall (a^3) m. _resistance, opposition_, Æ.

wiðersýnes adv. _'widdershins,' backwards_, #Bl# 93^19.

wiðertalu f. _contradiction_, ÆH 1·530^6.

wiðertîhtle f. _counter-charge_, LL.

wiðertrod ¶ n. _return, retreat_.

wiðertýme _troublesome, grievous_.

wiðerweard _contrary, perverse, adverse_: _rebellious, hostile_, AO, CP:
_inconsistent_: _unfavourable, noxious, bad_.

wiðerwearda m. _adversary_, #Bl#.

wiðerweardian (y^3) _to oppose_.

wiðerweardlic _contrary, inimical, perverse_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

wiðerweardnes f. _opposition, perversity, arrogance, enmity_, Æ, CP:
_adversity, calamity, trouble_, CP.

wiðerwengel m. _adversary_, ARHy 4^7.

wiðerwennung f. _controversy_, #Sc# 146^15. [winnan]

wiðer-werd-, -wi(e)rd- = wiðerweard-

wiðerwinn n. _contest_, OEG 2^3.

wiðerwinna m. _opponent, rival, adversary, enemy_, Æ, AO, CP.

wiðerwinnan^3 _to revolt_, GPH 389.

+wiðerworded (i^2) _opposed_, DR 114^1.

wiðerwyrd == wiðerweard

wiðewinde = wiðowinde

wiðfaran^6 _to come off, escape_, #Ex# 573.

wiðfeohtan^3 _to fight against, rebel_.

wiðfeohtend m. _adversary_, CP.

wiðfêolan^3 _to apply oneself to_, BH.

wiðferian ¶ _to rescue, redeem_.

wiðflita = wiðerflita

wiðflîtan = wiðerflîtan

wiðfôn^7 (w. d.) _to grasp at, clutch_, B 760.

wiðforan I. prep. _before, in the presence of_. II. adv. _before,
previously_.

wið-gân anv., -gangan^7 _to go against, oppose_: _pass away, vanish,
disappear_.

wiðgehæftan = wiðhæftan

wiðgemetnes f. _comparison_, BH 430^20.

wiðgeondan prep. _beyond_, Mt 3^5.

wiðgrîpan^1 _to grapple with_, B 2521.

wiðgýnan _to reject_, ÆL 23·541.

wiðhabban (w. d.) _to oppose, resist, restrain, hold out_, AO.

wiðhæbban = wiðhabban

wiðhæftan _to take possession of_.  [[from first edition]]

wiðheardian _to harden_, #ARSPs# 94^8.

wiðhindan adv. _behind_, Æ.

wið-hogian § (w. g.) _to disregard, reject_.

wiðhycgan ¶ _to reject, despise, scorn_.

wîði- = wîðig-

wîðig, wîði(g)e m. _withe_, _'withy,' willow_, Æ: _band, fetter, fillet,
garland_.

wîðigrind f. _willow bark_, #Lcd# 37a.

wîðing- = wîðig-

wiðinnan I. adv. _'within,' from within_, Æ. II. prep. (w. d. a.)
_within_.

wið-inne, -innen, -innon = wiðinnan I.

wiðir- (N) = wiðer-

wiðl¯ædan _to lead away, take away, rescue_, #Ps#.

wiðl¯ædnes f. _abduction_.

wîðlan (N) = wîdlan  [[variant of "wîdlian"]]

wiðlicgan^5 _to oppose, resist_.

wiðmetan^5 _to compare with, liken to_, Æ.

wiðmêtednes f. _invention, device_, #SPs#. [mêtan I.]

wið-metenlic, -metendlic _comparative (in grammar)_, #ÆGr#. [metan]

wiðmetennes f. _comparison_, Æ.

wiðmeting f. _comparison_.

wið-neoðan (Æ), -niðan, -nyðan adv. _below, underneath, beneath_.

wiðobân (wido-) n. _collar-bone_.

wiðone (#Bl#) = wið ðone

wiðor- = wiðer-

wiðowinde f. _convolvulus, woodbine_, #Gl#.

wiðr¯æde = wiðerr¯æde

wiðre ¶ n. _resistance, opposition_.

wiðrêotan^2 _to abhor_? _resist_? #El# 369 (GK).

wiðrian = wiðerian

wiðsacan^6 _to oppose, strive against_, AO: _to refute, contradict_:
_forsake, abandon, renounce, refuse, deny_, Æ, AO, CP.

wiðsacendlic _used in negations_, #ÆGr# 226^3.

wiðsacung f. _denial, renunciation_, #Sc# 60^14.

wiðsceorian (o^2) _to refuse_, CP 59^12.

wîðscrîðel = wîdscrîðol

wiðscûfan^2 _to thrust back, refute, repel_, BH.

wiðsêon^5 _to rebel, rise against_, AO.

wiðsetnes f. _opposition_, #Gl#.

wiðsettan _to withstand, resist_, Æ.

wiðslêan^6 _to oppose, bring to naught_, Æ, CP.

wiðsprecan^5 _to contradict, gainsay_: _converse_, AS: _revile_: _speak
with_, GD 345^8.

wiðspurnan^3 _to hit against_, MtL 4^5.

wiðstæppan^6 _to step or go out of_.

wiðstandan^6 (w. d.) _to 'withstand,' resist, oppose_, Æ, AO, CP.

wiðstandend m. _opponent_.

wiðsteall = wiðersteall

wiðsteppan = wiðstæppan

wiðstond- = wiðstand-

wiðstunian _to dash against_, #Lcd# 160b.

wiðstyllan _to retreat_, WW 17^26.

wiðstyltan _to hesitate, doubt_, MtL 21^21.

wiðtêon^2 _to take away, withdraw_: _restrain_, CP.

wiðtremman _to step back_, CP 441^27.

wiððe f. _withy, cord, band, thong, fetter_. [v. also wîðig]

wiððer- = wiðer-

wiððingian _to come to terms with, be reconciled to_, MF 178.

wiððir (DR 168^2) = wiðer

wiððyddan _to blunt_, v. OEG 4235.

wiðufan I. prep. (w. d.) _above_. II. adv. _before, previously_.

wið-uppon, -uppan adv. _above_.

wiðûtan I. prep. (w. d.) _outside of_, AO: _except_: _without_. II. adv.
_from outside, outside_, Æ.

wiðweorpan^3 ¶ _to reject, repudiate_.

wiðwinde = wiðewinde

wiðwinnan^3 _to fight against, resist, oppose_, AO, CP.

wiðwiðerian _to resist, withstand_, GD 117^19.

wixð = wiexð pres. 3 sg. of weaxan.

±wlacian _to become lukewarm, be tepid_, Æ, CP.

wlaco, wlacu, wlæc _tepid, lukewarm, cool_, CP.

wlacunes = wlæcnes

wlæc v. wlaco.

wlæce n. _tepidity_, GPH 397.

wlæclic _lukewarm_. adv. -lîce.

wl¯æclîce (#PPs# 148^5) = wr¯æclîce

wlæcnes f. _lukewarmness_, CP.

wlæffetere m. _stammerer_, GPH 403.

wlæffian _to stammer, speak indistinctly_, v. NC 333.

wlænc = wlanc, wlenc

wlænco = wlenco  [[under "wlenc"]]

wl¯æta = wl¯ætta

+wl¯ætan _to defile, debase_, #Bo# 114^23.

wlætlîce = wlæclîce

wl¯ætta m. _loathing, nausea, eructation, heartburn_, Æ: _an object of
loathing_: _disfigurement_, OEG 4461.

wl¯ætung (â, ê) f. _nausea_: _disfigurement_, OEG 4461.

wlanc (æ, o) _stately, splendid, lofty, magnificent, rich_: _boastful,
arrogant, proud_.

wlancian _to become proud or boastful, exult_.

wlanclic adj. _proud, arrogant_. adv. -lîce, #Gl#.

wlât pret. 3 sg. of wlîtan.

wlâtere m. _spectator_, NC 333.

-wlâtful v. nebb-w.  [[headword spelled "nebwlâtful"]]

wlâtian I. ¶ _to gaze, look upon, behold_. [wlîtan] II. (impers.) _to
loathe_, Æ.

wlâtung I. f. '_spectaculum_,' NC 334. II. = wl¯æt(t)ung

±wleccan _to make tepid_, CP. [wlæc]

wlenc, wlenco (AO, CP), wlencu f. _pride, arrogance, haughtiness_:
_glory, pomp, splendour_, AO, CP: (¶) _bravado_: _prosperity, riches,
wealth_. [wlanc]

+wlencan _to render proud_: _adorn, enrich, exalt_.

wlêttung = wl¯ætung

wlisp, wlips (Æ) _lisping_.

wlispian _to lisp_.

wlita m. _countenance_, #Gl#.

wlîtan^1 ¶ _to gaze, look, observe_.

wlite m. _brightness_: _appearance, form, aspect, look, countenance_:
_beauty, splendour_, Æ: _adornment_, CP.

wliteandet? n. _confession of splendour_, #PPs# 103^2.

wlitebeorht ¶ _beauteous_.

wliteful _beautiful_, #Sc# 21^8.

wlitelêas _ugly_, #An# 1171.

wlitelîce _handsomely_, #Bl# 205^6.

wlitescîne (ý^3) _lovely, beautiful_.

wlîtesêon f. _sight, spectacle_, B 1650.

wlitetorht ¶ _brilliant, lovely_.

wlitewamm (o^3) m. _disfigurement of the face_.

wliteweorð n. _legal value of a man's life, ransom_, GD 179^21.

wlitig _radiant, beautiful, fair, comely_, Æ, CP. adv. -ige, -iglîce.

wlitigfæst _of enduring beauty_, #Ph# 125.

±wlitigian _to beautify, adorn_: _become beautiful_, #Seaf# 49: _form,
fashion_, #Pss#.

wlitignes f. _beauty, splendour_, #Bl#.

wlitu = wlite

wlô = wlôh

wlôh f., dp. wlô(u)m _fringe, ornament, tuft_: _bit_, #Gu# 1127.

+wlôh _adorned_, #Gen# 1789.

wlonc = wlanc

wlott _spot, blemish_, OEG 648?

wlôum v. wlôh.

wlyt- = wlit-

wô == wôh

wôc (pret. of wacan).

wôcer = wôcor

wocie, wocige _noose_, OEG 962; 3560.

wôclic = wôhlic

wôcor ¶ f. (gs. wôcre) _increase, growth_: _offspring, progeny,
posterity, race_: _usury_.

wocorlîce = wacorlîce  [[form of "wacor"]]

wôcs = wôsc pret. 3 sg. of wascan.

wôd I. adj. _mad, raging, senseless_, Æ, AO: _blasphemous_. II. pret. 3
sg. of wadan.

wôda I. m. _madman_, Æ. II. m. _storm, flood_? _danger_? TC 341^8.

wodawistle = wodewistle

woddor n. _throat, gullet_? #Sol# 95.

wôddrêam m. '_dæmonium_,' #RPs# 95^5 (v. ES 38^25).

wôdelic = wôdlic

Wôden m. _Woden_: _Mercury_.

wôdendrêam m. _madness_, WW 245^10.

wôdenesdæg = wôdnesdæg

wodewistle f. _hemlock_, #Gl#.

wôd-frec, -fræc _madly ravenous_.

wôdheortnes f. _madness_, MFH 178.

wôdian = wêdan

wôdlic _mad, furious_, Æ. adv. -lîce _madly, furiously_:
_blasphemously_.

wôdnes f. _madness, frenzy, folly_, Æ.

Wôdnes gs. of Wôden.

wôdnesdæg m. _Woden's day, Wednesday_.

wôdnesniht f. _Tuesday night_.

wôdôm = wôhdôm

wôdon pret. pl. of wadan.

wôdscinn n. _madness, folly_, W 80^3.

wôdscipe m. _insanity_, WW 245^12.

wôdsêoc _mad_, GD 135^1.

wôdsêocnes f. _madness_.

wôdðrâg f. _paroxysm, madness, rage, fury_, CP.

woe- (A) = we-, wê-

woecan (N) = wæccan

woerc- (N) = weorc-

woerd- = wird-

woffian _to shout, rave_: _blaspheme_.

woffung f. _doting, madness, raving_: _blasphemy_.

wôg == wôh

wôgere m. _wooer, suitor, sweetheart_, Æ.

wôgerlic _amorous_, NC 334.

wôgian _to woo, court, marry_, #Sc#.

wôgung f. _wooing_, ÆL 7^301.

wôh I. n. _bending, crookedness_: _error, mistake_, Æ: _perversity,
wrong, iniquity, depravity_. on w. _wrongly, wickedly_. II. adj. _bent,
awry, twisted, crooked_: _wrong, perverse, evil, depraved, bad, unjust_:
_false (weight)_, W 70^3. on wôn _wrongfully, in error_.

wôhbogen ¶ _bent, crooked_.

wôhcêapung f. _fine for illegal trafficking_, KC 5·143^22.

wôhd¯æd f. _wrong deed, crime_.

wôhdôm m. _unjust judgment_, A 8·336.

wôhfôted _having deformed feet_, WW 161^30.

wôhfremmend m. _evildoer_, #Met# 9^36.

wôhful _wicked_, NG.

wôhfulnes f. _wickedness_, NG.

wôhgeorn _inclined to evil_, W 183^8.

wôhgestrêon n. _ill-gotten property_, W.

wôhgod n. _false god, idol_.

wôhh¯æmed n. _fornication, adultery_, CP.

wôhh¯æmend m. _fornicator, adulterer_, CP.

wôhh¯æmere m. _fornicator, adulterer_, CP 401^30.

wôhhandede _maimed (of the hands)_, WW 161^29.

wohhian? _to speak wildly, rave_? NC 334.

wôhlic _perverse, wrong, unjust, evil_. adv. -lîce, Æ.

wôhnebb n. _grimace_.

wôhnes f. _crookedness, crooked place_, Æ: _wrong, error_:
_wickedness_, Æ.

wôhs, wôhson = wôsc, wôscon pret. 3 sg. and pret. pl. of wascan.

wôhsum _evil_, DR 27^9 (wôg-).

wôl mf. _pestilence, plague, mortality, disease_, AO, CP.

wôlb¯ærnes f. _calamity, pest_, AO 62^34.

wôlberende _pestilential, pernicious_, CP.

wôlberendlic _pestilential_, #Chr# 1086.

wôlbryne m. _pestilence_, AO 86^24.

wolc (WW 175^20) = wolcen

wolc- = walc-, wolcen-

wolcen nm. (nap. wolcnu) _'convolutio,' ball, lump_, #PPs# 147^5:
_cloud_, Æ: _sky, heavens_. ['_welkin_']

wolcenfaru ¶ f. _scudding of clouds_.

wolcengehnâst n. _meeting of clouds (in a storm)_, #Rd# 4^60.

wolcenrêad = weolocrêad

wolcenwyrcende? ptc. _cloud-making (Centaurs)_, WW 456^24.

wolcn == wolcen

wolcrêad = weolocrêad

wolcspinl = walcspinl

wol-cyrge, -cyrige = wælcyrige

wold = weald

wôldæg m. _day of pestilence_, #Ruin# 26.

wôldberendlic = wôlberendlic

wol-de, -don pret. 3 sg. and pret. pl. of willan.

wôlgewinn n. _calamitous war_, AO 64^15.

wôlic == wôhlic

wollentêare _weeping, with flowing tears_, B 3032.

-wolma v. fôt-w.  [[under "fôtwelm"]]

wom == wam(m)

wôm I. = wôgum dp. of wôh, adj. II. = wôma

wôma m. _noise, howling, tumult_: _terror, alarm_. swefnes w.
_dream-tumult, vision_: _eloquence_? OEG 8b^10.

woman intr. _to infringe_, EC 151^16: (+) tr. w. d. pers. and g. thing
_deprive of_, EC 151^17. [wamm]

won I. = wan, wann. II. pret. 3 sg. of winnan.

wôn I. wk. gdsn. and dpmn. of wôh. II. = hwôn

won- = wan-

wôna gp. of wôh II.

wondor = wundor

wônes = wôhnes

wong == wang

wôp I. m. _cry, shrieking, weeping, lamentation_, Æ, CP. [wêpan] II. =
wêop pret. 3 sg. of wêpan.

wôpdropa m. _tear_, #Sol# 283.

wôpen pp. of wêpan.

wôperian _to weep_, HL 18^32.

wôpig _sad, lamenting_, Æ.

wôplêoð n. _dirge, elegy_, OEG 3504.

wôplic _tearful, sad_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

wôpstôw f. _place of mourning_, Æ.

wôr = wôs, wâse  [["wâse" headword spelled "wase"]]

wôra gp. of wôh.

worc == weorc

word I. n. _'word,' speech, sentence, statement_, Æ: _command, order_:
_subject of talk, story, news, report_, Æ, AO: _fame_: _verb_, Æ:
_(incarnate) Word_. II. _rod_, #CPs#: _(gooseberry) bush_? LkL 6^44
(v. ES 38·340; 40·152). III. = werod

word-bêot ¶ n., -bêotung § f. _promise in words, plighted word_.

wordcærse (WW 416^8) = *worðcærse, worðigcærse?

wordcennend m. _the begetter of the Word_, GPH 389.

wordcræft ¶ m. _poetic art, eloquence_.

word-cwide, (e, y) -cwyðe m. _words, speech, language, utterance_.

worden pp. of weorðan.

wordes adv. _with words, verbally, orally_.

wordfæst _true to one's word, true_.

wordful _talkative, verbose, fluent_.

wordgebêot = wordbêot

word-gecwide (æ^3) n., -gecweodu np. _verbal agreement_.

wordgemearc n. _definition or limitation by words_, #Gen# 2355.

wordgerýne ¶ n. _secret expressed in words, dark saying_.

wordglêaw _skilful in words_, #Da# 418.

wordgydd m. _lay, dirge_, B 3173.

wordhlêoðor ¶ n. _voice, speech_.

wordhord ¶ n. _treasury of words_.

wordig _wordy, verbose_, OEG 1416.

wordlâc n. _speech_, #LPs# 18^4.

wordlâr f. _teaching_, NC 334.

wordlatu f. _delay in speech_? #An# 1519.

wordlaðu ¶ f. _conversation, speech_.

wordlêan n. _reward for song_, #Rd# 78^9.

wordlian (u^1) _to talk, commune_: _conspire_, GD 106^1.

wordliend m. _speaker_, OEG 2321.

wordloc n. _art of logic_, WW 388^11.

wordloca ¶ m. _(word-hoard), speech_.

wordloga m. _deceiver, liar_, W 40^10.

wordlung n. _talk, discourse_: _empty talk_.

wordmittung f. '_collatio_,' WW 178^35.

wordpredicung f. _preaching_, NC 334.

wordrian = wordlian

wordriht n. _suitable word_, B 2631: _spoken law_, #Ex# 3.

wordsâwere m. _word-sower, rhetorician_, CP 97^4.

wordsige m. _success in speech_, #Lcd# 1·188^15.

word-snoter, -snotor _eloquent, rhetorical, wise in words_.

wordsnoterlic _philosophical, learned_, OEG 2270.

wordsnoterung f. _sophism_, OEG 2268.

wordsomnere m. _enumeration, catalogue_, WW 212^27.

wordsomnung f. '_collatio_,' WW 178^35.

wordwîsa m. _sophist_, WW 493^30.

wordwrîtere = wyrdwrîtere

wordwynsum _affable_, WW 191^21.

wôre dsf. of wôh.

worf = weorf

worfian = woffian

wôrhana m. _moor-cock, cock pheasant_, #Gl#.

wôrhenn f. _hen pheasant_, WW.

wôrhona = wôrhana

worht pp., wôrhte pret. 3 sg. of wyrcan.

wôrian _to roam, wander_, Æ: _move round, totter, crumble to pieces_.
[wôr, wêrig]

world == woruld

worm = wyrm

wormôd = wermôd

worms (u) nm. _matter, pus, virus_, AO, CP.

worn (ea, eo) m. _large amount, number, troop, company, multitude,
crowd_.

worngehât n. _promise of numerous offspring_, #Gen# 2364?

wornlust = womlust  [[variant of "wamlust"?]]

wornm¯ælum adv. _by troops_.

worod = werod

woroht = wrôht

worold (AO, CP) = woruld

worpan = weorpan

worpen pp. of weorpan.

worpian _to cast, throw, pelt_, CP.

worsm = worms

wort = wyrt

worð I. (eo, u) nm. _court, courtyard, curtilage, farm_, Mdf: _street_.
II. = waroð

worð- = weorð-

worðig (eo, u, y) m. _enclosed homestead, curtilage, farm_, Æ, CP; Mdf:
_street_.

worðigcærse f. _name of a plant_, #Lcd# 3·303.

worðignetele f. _nettle_.

worðscipe = weorðscipe

worud = werod I.

woruftord = weorftord

woruld (e^1, eo^1, ia^1; o^2) f. _'world,' age_, Æ, AO, CP: _men,
humanity_: _way of life, life_: _long period of time, cycle, eternity_.
tô worulde _for ever_. â on worulda world, in woruld worulde _world
without end_.

woruld¯æht f. _worldly possessions_.

woruldafol (-el) n. _secular or worldly power_, LL, W (ES 45·161).

woruldâr f. _worldly honour_, CP: _secular property_.

woruldbearn n. _man_, #Rd# 81^27.

woruldbisgu f. _worldly occupation_, LL.

woruldbisgung (eo^1, y^2) f. _worldly business_: _worldly misery,
trouble_.

woruldbismer (o^2) nm. _worldly reproach_, CP 61^10.

woruldbliss f. _worldly bliss_, #Gu# 135.

woruldbôt f. _compensation prescribed by the secular power_, LL 128[2].

woruld-broc n., -bryce (o^2) m. _worldly trouble_, CP 259^2: _use for
secular purposes_, MH 136^9.

woruldbûend ¶ m. _world-dweller_.

woruldcamp m. _secular warfare_, LL (388^4).

woruldcandel f. _sun_, B 1965.

woruldcearu (a^3) f. _worldly care_, Æ.

woruldcempa m. _earthly soldier_, Æ.

woruldcræft m. _secular art_, Æ.

woruldcund _worldly, secular_, CP. adv. -lîce, CP.

woruldcyning ¶ m. _earthly king_, Æ.

woruldd¯æd f. _worldly business_, LL (414^33).

worulddêad _dead_, #PPs# 142^4.

worulddêma m. _secular judge_, LL.

worulddôm m. _secular judgment_, Æ.

worulddrêam ¶ m. _earthly joy_.

worulddrihten m. _lord of the world, God_, #Met# 29^1.

woruldduguð ¶ f. _worldly riches_.

woruldearfoð ¶ n. _earthly misery_.

woruldege m. _earthly fear_, LL (310^19).

woruldende m. _end of the world_, B 3083.

woruldfægernes f. _earthly beauty_, MH 34^8.

woruldfeoh n. _earthly goods, wealth_, #Gen# 2142.

woruldfolgað m. _worldly occupation_, #Bl#.

woruldfrætwung (world-) f. _worldly ornament_, #Bl# 125^36.

woruldfrêond (ý^3) m. _friend in this world_.

woruldfrið m. _worldly peace_, LL 220[1].

woruldfruma m. _primeval man, patriarch_, #Guth# 12^28.

woruldgâlnes f. _lust of pleasure_, W 219^14.

woruldgebyrd n. _worldly origin or descent_, BH.

woruldgedâl n. _death_, #El# 581.

woruldgefeoht (o^2) n. _earthly fight_, MH 36^26.

woruldgeflit n. _dispute, law-suit_? #Lcd# 3·174^19.

woruldger¯ædnes (eo^1) f. _secular ordinance_, LL.

woruldgeriht n. _worldly justice, secular right or due_, LL 210[2,1].

woruldgerýsnu np. _secular customs_, LL.

woruldges¯ælig _prosperous_, #Ma# 219.

woruldges¯ælða fp. _worldly fortune_, AO(o^2).

woruldgesceaft ¶ f. _creature of this world_: _world_.

woruldgestrêon ¶ n. _worldly riches_.

woruldgeswinc n. _earthly toil, misery_, CP(o^2).

woruldgeðincð f. _worldly honour, dignity_, GD, W.

woruldgeðôht (world-) mn. _worldly thought_, #Bl# 15^14.

woruldgewinn n. _earthly war_, Æ.

woruldgewritu np. _worldly literature, secular writings_.

woruldgewuna m. _customary law_, LL 206[1a].

woruldgielp (i^3) mn. _pride of this world, glory_, CP.

woruldgifu f. _worldly gift_.

woruldgîtsere m. _coveter of worldly things_, #Met# 14^1.

woruldgîtsung f. _covetousness_.

woruldglenge m. _worldly pomp_.

woruldgôd n. _worldly good_.

woruldgylp (Æ) = woruldgielp

woruldgyrla (o^2) m. _worldly garment_, NC 334.

woruldhâd m. _secular state_, BH, GD.

woruldhlâford m. _secular lord_, CP.

woruldhlîsa m. _worldly fame_, Æ.

woruldhogu (world-) f. _worldly care_.

woruldhremming (o^2) f. '_impedimentum sæculi_,' NC 334.

woruldhyht m. _earthly joy_, #Az# 136.

woruldl¯æce m. _earthly physician_, Æ.

woruld-lagu f., -laga m. _civil law_.

woruldlêan n. _earthly reward_, LL (422^12).

woruldlic _earthly_, Æ: _worldly, secular_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

woruldlîf n. _life in this world_.

woruldlufu f. _love of this world_, Æ.

woruldlust m. _worldly pleasure_, #Bo#.

woruldm¯æg m. _earthly kinsman_, #Gen# 2178.

woruldman m. _human being, man of the world_, Æ, CP: _layman_.

woruldmêd f. _earthly reward_, LL (422^14).

woruldnêod f. _temporal need_, LL 267[32].

woruldnytt f. _worldly use or profit_.

woruldprýdo f. _worldly pride_, #Lcd# 3·428. [v. '_pride_']

woruldr¯æden f. _way of the world_, B 1143 (v. MLN 25·113).

woruldrica m. _great man_, Æ.

woruldrîce I. n. _earthly kingdom_, CP: _world-realm, world_. II. adj.
_having worldly power or riches_.

woruldrîcetere (o^2) n. _worldly power_, NC 334.

woruldriht (y^3) n. _secular or civil law_: _God's law for the world_.

woruldsacu f. _worldly strife_, W 170^9.

worulds¯ælða fp. _earthly blessings_, #Bo#.

woruldscamu (ea^3) f. _public disgrace_.

woruldsceaft ¶ f. _earthly creature_.

woruldscêat m. _part of the world, region_.

woruldscêawung f. _worldly sight_, NC 334.

woruldscipe m. _worldly matter_, CP.

woruldscîr (world-) f. _life in the world (i.e. not monastic)_, _worldly
affairs, business_, GD 3^7.

woruldsnotor _worldly-wise_.

woruldsorg f. _earthly care_, CP.

woruldspêd f. _worldly wealth, success in the world_, CP.

woruldspêdig _rich in this world_, CP 333^2.

woruldspr¯æc f. _worldly talk, conversation about worldly matters_, LL.

woruldstêor f. _secular penalty_, LL 258[51].

woruldstrang _having worldly power_, NC 334.

woruldstrengu f. _physical strength_, #Rd# 27^2.

woruldstrûdere m. _world-spoiler, spoliator, robber_.

woruldstund f. _life in this world, sojourn upon earth_, #El# 363.

woruldðearf f. _this world's needs_, BH.

woruld-ðearf, -ðearfende _poor in worldly goods_.

woruldðearfa m. _poor man_, #PPs# 69^5.

woruldðêaw m. _worldly affair_, #Bo# 7^13.

woruld-ðegen, -ðegn, -ðên m. _earthly or secular servant_, LL.

woruldðênung (o^2) f. _secular office_, NC 334.

woruldðêostru (y^3) f. _earthly darkness_.

woruldðêowdôm m. _secular service_.

woruldðing (o^2) n. _worldly affair, thing_, Æ, AO, CP: _earthly
riches_.

woruldw¯æpn (o^2) n. _earthly weapon_, #Bl# 213^4.

woruldwæter n. _ocean, sea_.

woruldwela m. _worldly wealth_, CP.

woruldwelig _rich in worldly goods_, NC 335.

woruldweorc n. _secular work_.

woruldweorðscipe m. _worldly honour_.

woruldwîdl n. _world-filth_, #Cr# 1007.

woruldwig n. _worldly contest_, LL.

woruldwilla m. _earthly good_, #Bo# 24^2.

woruldwilnung f. _earthly desire_, CP.

woruldwîs _worldly-wise_, CP(o^2).

woruldwîsdôm m. _worldly wisdom, science_, Æ.

woruldwîse f. _custom of the world_, MH 68^9#b#.

woruldwita m. _learned layman, philosopher_, LL.

woruldwîte n. _punishment on earth_: _civil punishment, fine_.

woruldwlenco f. _worldly magnificence, ostentation_, CP.

woruldwrenc m. _worldly cunning_, CP(o^2).

woruldwrîtere m. _writer about the world, philosopher_.

woruldwuldor n. _worldly glory_.

woruldwuniende (o^2) _dwelling in the world_, #Met# 13^17.

woruldwynn f. _earthly joy_.

woruldyrmðu f. _earthly wretchedness_, AO.

wôrung f. _wandering, roving_, Æ, MFH 179.

wôs I. n. _sap, juice_, #Lcd#. II. gs. of wôh.

±wosa m. _conversation, intercourse_, DR.

wôsan (NG) = wêsan

wôsc pret. 3 sg., wôscon pret. pl. of wascan.

wôse = wâse  [[headword spelled "wase"]]

wôsig _juicy, moist_, #Lcd#.

-wost v. fore-w.

wôð ¶ f. _sound, noise_: _voice, song, poetry_: _eloquence_.

wôðbora ¶ m. _orator, speaker, seer, prophet, poet, singer_.

wôðcræft ¶ m. _art of speech or song_.

-woðe v. got-w.

wôðgiefu f. _gift of song_, #Rd# 32^8.

wôðsong m. _song_, #Cr# 46.

wôum dp. of wôh, adj.

wôx I. pret. 3 sg. of weaxan. II. = wôsc

wracian _to be banished, be in exile_.

wraclîce = wræclîce

wracnian = wræcnian

wraco = wracu

wracu (e) f. (g. often wræce) _revenge, vengeance, persecution_, Æ, AO,
CP. on ðâ wrace _in retaliation_: _punishment, penalty_, AO, CP:
_cruelty, misery, distress, torture, pain_, AO. [wrecan]

wræc I. (e) n(f?) _misery_, CP: _vengeance, persecution_: _exile_.
['_wreck_'; wrecan] II. _what is driven_, OET 37^62. III. pret. 3 sg. of
wrecan. IV. = wærc (A; v. JAW 52)

wræca = wræcca

wræcan = wrecan

wræcca (e) m. '_wretch_,' CP: _fugitive, outcast, exile_, AO:
_adventurer, stranger_.

wræccan = wrecan

wræce v. wracu.

wræcend = wrecend

wræcfæc n. _time of exile, banishment, misery_, #Rim# 64.

wræcful _wretched, miserable_, Æ.

wr¯æchwîl f. _period of exile or of distress_, #Ph# 527.

wræclâst ¶ (e) m. _path of exile_.

wræclâstian _to banish_, WW.

wræclic adj. _foreign_: _strange, unfamiliar, extraordinary_: _wretched,
exiled_. adv. -lîce.

wr¯æclic = wr¯ætlic

wræc-mæcg ¶, -mæcga § m. _exile, outcast, miserable man_.

wræcmon m. _fugitive_, #Ex# 137.

wr¯æcnan = wr¯æcnian  [[headword spelled "wræcnian"]]

wræcnes = wrecnes

wræcnian (e) _to be banished, wander travel_, Æ.

wr¯æcon pret. pl. of wrecan.

wræcscipe (e) m. _exile_.

wræcsetl n. _place of exile_, #Gu# 267.

wræcsîð m. _journey of exile or peril, pilgrimage_, Æ: _exile,
persecution_, Æ, AO: _misery_.

wræcsîðian _to wander, travel abroad, be in exile_, Æ.

wræcstôw f. _place of exile or punishment_.

wræcwîte n. _punishment_, #Bl#.

wr¯æcworuld f. _miserable world_, W 1^2.

wr¯æd f. _band, bandage, 'wreath,'_ CP: _bundle_: _band, flock_. [wrîðan]

wr¯ædm¯ælum adv. _in companies_, WW 411^42.

-wr¯ædnes v. sam-w.

wr¯æg- = wrêg-

wr¯æne (ê) _unbridled, loose, lustful_, AO.

wrænna (Æ) = wrenna

wr¯ænnes f. _luxury, lust, wantonness_, AO, CP.

wr¯ænsa m. _wantonness_, OEG 2347.

wr¯ænscipe m. _wantonness_, OEG 5290 (ê).

wr¯ænsian _to be wanton_, NC 335.

wr¯æsnan _to alter, change, modulate_, #Rd# 25^1.

wr¯æst (â) _firm, able, strong, excellent_: _delicate_. adv. -e.

wr¯æstan I. (±) _to 'wrest,' bend, twist, twang_. II. _to be or make
elegant_? WW.

wr¯æstlere m. _wrestler_, WW 431^26.

wr¯æstlic I. _pertaining to wrestling_, WW. II. (â) _delicate,
elegant_, WW.

wr¯æstliend _wrestler_, WW 431^25. [wr¯æstan]

wr¯æstlung f. _wrestling, struggling_, GD, OEG.

wræt m. = wrætte f.

wr¯æt = wr¯ætt

wr¯ætlic _artistic, ornamental_: _curious, wondrous, rare_. adv. -lîce.
[wr¯ætt]

wr¯ætt ¶ f. _ornament, work of art, jewel_.

wrætte f. _rubea tinctoria_? _crosswort_? _hellebore_? (A 30·248).

wr¯æð I. = wr¯æd. II. = wr¯æððo

+wr¯æðan _to be enraged_, #Lcd# 3·212^4.

wræðian = wreðian

wr¯æðo = wr¯æððo

wr¯æð-studu, -stuðu (e) f. _column, pillar support_.

wr¯æððo, wr¯æð(ð)u (â) f. _'wrath,' anger, indignation_, NG.

wr¯æxlian = wr¯æstlian  [[variant of "wr¯æstan"]]

wrâh pret. 3 sg. of wrêon.

wrang I. n. _'wrong,' injustice_. [_ON._ rangr] II. pret. 3 sg. of
wringan. III. (o) = wranga

wranga (pr-) _hold of a ship_, WW.

wrangwîs _perverse_, OEG 1770.

wrâsen (¯æ) f. _band, tie, chain_.

wrâst == wr¯æst

wrât pret. 3 sg. of wrîtan.

wrâð I. adj. _'wroth,' furious, angry, hostile_, AO: _terrible,
horrible_: _grievous, harsh, bitter, malignant, evil, cruel_. adv. -e.
II. f. _cruelty_: _hardship_. [wrîðan] III. = wr¯æð. IV. pret. 3 sg. of
wrîðan.

+wrâðian (refl.) _to be angry_, _Chr_ 1070. ['_iwrathe_']

wrâðlic ¶ _grievous, severe, bitter_. adv. -lîce.

wrâðmôd ¶ _angry_.

wrâðscræf n. _wretched hole, pit of misery, hell_, #Rd# 41^41.

wrâððo = wr¯æððu  [[under "wr¯æððo"]]

wraðu f. _prop, help, support, maintenance_.

wrâðum adv. _fiercely_.

+wraxl? _wrestling-place, gymnasium_, OEG 18b^68?

wraxlere m. _wrestler_, OEG.

wraxlian _to wrestle_, Æ.

wraxliende _wrestling, contending, striving_.

wraxlung f. _wrestling_, WW 150^8.

wrêah pret. 3 sg. of wrêon.

wrec == wræc

wrecan^5 (eo) _to drive, impel, push_: _expel, persecute_, CP: (±)
_'wreak,' revenge, avenge, punish_, AO: _press forward, advance_:
_fulfil, accomplish_: _utter, deliver, pronounce_.

wreccan = (1) weccan; (2) wrecan

-wrecel v. spor-w.

wrecend m. _avenger_.

wrecnes (æ) f. _vengeance_, NG.

wrecscip (æ?) '_actuaria_'? ES 43·336.

wrecu (#VPs#) = wracu

±wrêgan I. ¶ _to excite, stir up_. II. _to accuse, impeach_, Æ. [wrôht]

wrêgend m. _accuser_.

wrêgendlic _accusative_, #ÆGr# 22^20.

wrêgere m. _accuser, informer_, Æ.

wrêgistre (¯æ) f. _female accuser_, ÆL 2^208.

wrêgung f. _accusation_, Æ.

wrêhte pret. 3 sg. of wrêgan.

wrehtend m. _instigator_, WW 420^29.

wrêhtend m. _accuser_, #KGl# 73^23.

wrên- = wr¯æn-

wrenc m. _wile, stratagem, trick, deceit_, AO: (¶) _modulation, melody,
song_. ['_wrench_']

wrencan _to twist_: _spin intrigues, devise plots_, #Mod# 33.

wrenna (æ) m., wrenne f. _wren_, WW.

wreocan = wrecan

wreogan (M) = wrigon pret. pl. of wrêon.

wrêoh imperat. of wrêon.

±wrêon^1,2 _to cover, clothe, envelop, conceal, hide_: _protect,
defend_.

wrêotan = rêotan

wreotian = writian

wreotu nap. of writ.

wrêoð = wr¯æð

wreoðenhilt _with twisted hilt_, B 1699. [= *wriðenhilt]

wreoðian = wreðian

wrêoðian = wrîdian

wretbasu '_rubeum_' (?= wr¯ætt- or wrætte- v. A 30·248).

±wreðian _to support, sustain, uphold_, CP.

wreðstudu = wræðstudu  [[headword spelled "wr¯æðstudu"]]

wrîanne (N) = wrêonne gerund of wrêon I.

wricð, wriceð pres. 3 sg. of wrecan.

wrid m. _shoot, plant, bush_, #Lcd#; Mdf.

+wrid n. _thicket_? #Guth#.

wrîdan^1 _to grow, thrive, flourish_.

wriden pp. of (1) wrîdan; (2) wrîðan.

wrîdian _grow, flourish, spring up_. [wrîdan]

wriecð = wricð pres. 3 sg. of wrecan.

wriexl == wrixl

wrîgels mn. _covering, veil_.

wrigen pp., wrigon pret. pl. of wrêon.

wrigennes (gn-) f. _a covering_, #EPs# 60^5.

wrîgian ¶ _to go, turn, twist, bend_: _strive, struggle, press forward,
endeavour, venture_.

wrîhst pres. 2 sg., wrîhð pres. 3 sg. of wrêon.

+wrinclian _to wind about_, KC 4·34^9.

+wring n. _liquor, drink_, WW 128^17.

wringan^3 _to 'wring,' twist_: (±) _squeeze, press out_, Æ.

wringe f. (_oil-_)_press_, GD 250^15.

wringhw¯æg n? _strained whey_, LL 451[16].

+wrisc = +wrixl

wrislan = wrixlan

wrist f. _wrist_, LL 386[2].

±writ n. _writing_: (±) _book, treatise_: _scripture_, Æ: _'writ'
('i-writ') charter, document, deed_, _AO, Bl_: '_stilus_,' GPH 402.

±wrîtan^1 (ý) _to incise, engrave_, _'write,' draw_, Æ, AO, CP: _bestow
by writing_.

wrîtbred n. _writing tablet_.

-wrîte v. wæter-w.

-writennes v. tô-w.

±wrîtere m. _writer, scribe, author, portrayer, painter_, Æ, CP.

wrîteýren (MH 146^12) = wrîtîren

writian (eo) _to chirp, chatter_, v. OEG 37^3.

wrîting f. _writing_, #SPs# 44^2.

wrîtingfeðer f. _pen_, #EPs# 44^3.

wrîtingîsen n. _style, pen_, MH 146^12#c#.

wrîtîren (y^2) n. _writing instrument, style_.

writseax n. _style, pen_, MtL p2^18.

writt- = wrît-

wriða m. _band, thong, bridle_, Æ: _collar, ring_.

±wrîðan^1 (ý) I. _to twist, wrap, bind up, tie, fasten, fetter_.
['_writhe_'] II. = wrîdan

+wriðelian _to bind_? OEG 23^7?

wrîðels m. _band, fillet, bandage_, WW 411^17.

wrîðian = wrîdian

wrixendlic _mutual_, GD 2^7. adv. -lîce _turn about, one by one, by
turns, in turn_.

wrixl f., wrixla m. _change, exchange, barter_, CP.

+wrixl, +wrixle n. _turn, change_: _exchange, purchase_: _requital_.

wrixlan (±) _to change, barter, exchange, reciprocate, lend_, AO.
wordum w. _converse_: (+) _recompense, requite_: (+) _obtain_.

wrixlian = wrixlan

+wrixlic _alternating_, OEG 2^135.

±wrixlung f. _exchange_: _loan_.

wroegan = wrêgan

wrogen pp. of wrêon.

wroht = worht pp. of wyrcan.

wrôht I. f. _blame, reproach, accusation, slander_: _fault, crime, sin,
injustice_, Æ: _strife, enmity, anger, contention, dispute_, AO, CP:
_hurt, injury, calamity, misery_. [wrêgan] II. m. _tale-bearer_, #ÆGr#
217^2.

wrôhtberend m. _accuser_.

wrôhtbora m. _accuser, monster_: _the devil_.

wrôhtdropa m. _bloodshed accompanied by crime_, #GnE# 196.

wrôhtgem¯æne _pledged to punishment or revenge_.

wrôhtgeorn _contentious_, CP 357.

wrôhtgetême n. _series of crimes_? (BT), #Gen# 45.

wrôhtian _to do harm_? HL 15^105.

wrôhtlâc n. _calumny_, W 160^5n.

wrôhtsâwere m. _sower of strife_, CP 359.

wrôhtscipe m. _crime_, #Gen# 1672.

wrôhtsmið ¶ m. _worker of evil, evildoer_.

wrôhtspitel _slanderous_, #EGl#. [spittan]

wrôhtstæf ¶ m. _accusation_, #El# 926: _injury_, #Rd# 72^12,14.

wrong (WW 201^35) = wrang II.

wrôt m. _snout, elephant's trunk_, WW.

wrôtan^7 _to root up_, Æ.

wrugon pret. pl. of wrêon.

wrungen pp. of wringan.

wrycð pres. 3 sg. of wrecan.

wryhta = wyrhta

wrýhð = wrihð pret. 3 sg. of wrêon.

+wrynded _founded (of a house)_, MtL 7^25.

wrýt- = wrît-

wrýte (CM 56^83) = prýte  [[under "prýto"]]

wrýðan = wrîðan

wucaðên = wucðegn

wuce = wucu

wuc-dæg, wuce-, wicu- m. _week-day_, Æ.

wucðegn (i^1) m. _monk or priest appointed for a week's duty, weekly
servant_.

wucðênung f. _service for a week_.

wucu f. '_week_,' AO, CP.

wucubôt f. _penance lasting a week_, LL (278^12).

wucweorc (i^1) n. _(compulsory) work for a week, by a tenant_.

wude == wudu

wudere m. _wood-man, wood-carrier_, WW 371^5.

wudewe = wuduwe

wudian _to cut wood_, Æ.

wudig _wooded, having trees_, #Az# 120.

wudigere, wudiere (WW) = wudere

wudiht _thick (with trees)_, _woody, forest-like_, GPH 402.

wudo- = wudu-

wudu m., gs. wuda, wudes; nap. wudas, wuda _'wood,' forest, grove_, Æ,
AO, CP; Mdf: _tree (the Cross)_: _wood, timber_, Æ, CP: (¶) _ship_, B:
_spear-shaft_, B 398.

wuduælfen = wuduelfen

wuduæppel f. _wild apple, crab_, #Lcd# 71a.

wudub¯ære _wood-bearing_, OEG 1806.

wudubærnett n. _burning of wood_, LL 16[12]; 24n^2.

wudubât n. _wooden boat_, #An# 907.

wudubêam ¶ m. _forest-tree_.

wudubearo m. _forest, grove_.

wudu-bend, -bind m. = wudubinde

wudubill n. _hatchet_, GD, WW.

wudubinde I. (-bindle) f. _woodbine, convolvulus_. II. f. _bundle of
sticks_, OET 35^18.

wudubior (= bora?) m. _wood carrier_, #HGl# 427.

wudubl¯æd ¶ (-blêd) f. _forest blossom_.

wudubrûn n. _bugloss, ox-tongue_.

wudubucca m. _wild buck, wild goat_, #Lcd#.

wudubyrðra m. _camp-follower_, OEG 869.

wuducerfille f. _wood-chervil, cow-parsley_.

wuducocc m. _woodcock_, #Gl#.

wuducroft m. _a croft with trees on it_? (BT) KC 3·376^6.

wuduculfre m. _wood-pigeon_, WW.

wuducûnelle f. _wild thyme_, #Lcd#.

wuducynn n. _an aromatic_ (?) _wood_, JnL 12^3.

wududocce f. _wild dock, sorrel_, #Lcd#.

wuduelfen f. _wood-elf, dryad_, WW.

wudufæsten n. _place protected by woods, wood-fastness_: _ship_.

wudufeld m. _wooded plain_, #PPs# 131^6.

wudufeoh n. _forest-tax_, #Lcd#.

wudufille = wuducerfille

wudufîn f. _pile of wood_, #ÆGr#.

wudufugol m. _forest bird, wild fowl_.

wudugât f. _wild goat_, #Lcd#.

wudugehæg n. _enclosed wood_? (BT), KC 3·176^1.

wuduhêawere m. _wood-cutter_, Æ.

wuduherpað m. _public path through a wood_, KC 3·213^2.

wuduhîewet n. _cutting of wood_, LL 567[37].

wuduholt n. _forest, wood, grove_.

wuduhona m. _woodcock_, WW 38^8.

wuduhrofe = wudurofe

wuduhunig n. _wild honey_, Æ.

wudulâd f. _carting wood_, LL 452[21,4].

wudu-l¯æs f., gs. -l¯æswe _wood-pasture, run (for cattle) in a wood_, Ct.

wuduland n. _woodland_.

wudu-leahtric, -lectric m. _wood-lettuce, wild sleepwort_. #Lcd#.

wudulêswe = wudul¯æswe  [[form of "wudul¯æs"]]

wudulic adj. _woody, wooded_, Æ.

wudum¯ær (ê^3) f. _wood-nymph, echo_, #Gl#.

wudumerce m. _wild parsley, wood-mint_.

wudur¯æden f. _wood-regulation, right of estovers_, LL.

wudurêc m. _smoke from a funeral pyre_, B 3144.

wudurima m. _border of a wood_, KC 3·34^15.

wudurofe f. _woodruff_.

wudurose f. _wild rose_, #Lcd# 34b?

wudusnîte f. _wood-snipe, thistle-finch_? WW.

wudusûræppel f. _crab-apple_? #Lcd# 160a.

wudutelga § m. _twig or branch of a tree_.

wudutrêow n. _forest tree_.

wuduðistle m. _wood-thistle_, #Lcd#.

wuduwa (wyde-) m. _widower_.

wuduwald m. _forest_, WW 426^35.

wuduwanhâd m. _state of a woman who has not a husband, chastity,
widowhood_, CP.

wuduwâsa m. _faun, satyr_.

wuduwe (i, eo, y^1; e^2) f. '_widow_.'

wuduweard m. _forester_, LL 452[19].

wudu-weax n., -weaxe f. _wood-waxen, genista tinctoria_, #Lcd#.

wuduwêsten mn. _wild forest_.

wuduwinde f. _woodbine_, #Gl#.

wuduwyrt f. _plant which grows in woods_, #Bl# 59^3.

wudwe = wuduwe

wuhhung f. _rage, fury, madness_: (pl.) _the Furies_.

wuht AO, CP = wiht

wuhung = wuhhung

wul == wull

wulder = wuldor

wuldor n. _glory, splendour, honour_, Æ, CP: _praise, thanks_: _heaven_,
#El#.

wuldor-bêag, -bêah m. _crown of glory_, Æ.

±wuldorbêagian _to crown_, Æ.

wuldorbl¯æd m. _glorious success_, #Jud# 156.

wuldorcyning m. ¶ _glorious king, King of Glory, God_.

wuldordrêam ¶ m. _heavenly rapture_.

Wuldorfæder ¶ m. _Glorious Father, Father of Glory_.

wuldorfæst _glorious_. adv. -fæste, -fæstlîce.

wuldorfæstlicnes f. _glory_, Æ.

wuldorful _glorious_, Æ: _vainglorious_.

wuldorfullian _to glorify_, Æ.

wuldorfullîce adv. _gloriously_, Æ.

wuldorgâst m. _angel_, #Gen# 2912.

wuldorgeflogena m. _one who has fled from glory, devil_, #Lcd# 3·36^15.

wuldorgesteald ¶ np. _glorious dwellings, realms of glory_.

wuldorgeweorc n. _wondrous work_, ES 43·167.

wuldorgifu ¶ (eo) f. _glorious gift, grace_.

wuldorgim m. _glorious jewel, sun_, #Rd# 81^20.

wuldorhama ¶ (o^3) m. _garb of glory_.

wuldorhêap m? _glorious troop_, NC 335.

wuldorhelm m. _crown of glory_, #Bl#.

wuldorlêan ¶ n. _glorious reward_.

wuldorlic _glorious_. adv. -lîce.

wuldormâga m. _heir of heaven_, #Gu# 1067.

wuldormago m. _heir of heaven_, #Gu# 1267.

wuldormicel _gloriously great_, ¶Hy 7^94.

wuldornytting f. _glorious service_, #Rd# 81^19.

wuldorsang m. _glorious song_, MFH 114^10.

wuldorspêd f. _glorious wealth_, #Gen# 87.

wuldorspêdig _glorious_, #An# 428.

wuldortân m. _plant with medicinal virtues_? (BT), #Lcd# 3·34.

wuldortorht ¶ _gloriously bright, clear, brilliant, illustrious_.

wuldorðrymm m. _heavenly glory_.

wuldorweorud n. _heavenly host_, #Cr# 285.

wuldorword n. _glorious word_, ¶Hy 7^46.

wuldrian (±) _to glorify, praise, extol_, Æ: _boast, brag_, Æ: _live in
glory_, Æ.

wuldrig _glorious_, DR.

wuldrung f. _glorying, boasting_.

wuldur == wuldor

wulf m. (_he-_)'_wolf_,' Æ, AO, CP; Mdf: _wolfish person, devil_.

wulfescamb m. _wild teasel_.

wulfesfîst m. _bullfist, toadstool (plant)_.

wulfhaga m. _shelter from wolves_? CC 53.

wulfhêafodtrêo m. _cross, gallows_? #Rd# 56^12.

wulfheort ¶ _wolf-hearted, cruel_.

wulf-hlið n., nap. -hleoðu _hillside inhabited by wolves_, B 1358.

wulfhol n. _wolf's hole_, WW.

wulflýs n. _fleece of wool_, WW 198^26.

wulfmod = wullmod

wulfsêað m. _wolf's hole_, KC 3·264^5.

wulfsl¯æd n. _valley of wolves_, KC 3·456^6.

wull f. '_wool_,' Æ.

wullcamb m. _comb for wool_, LL 454[15,1].

wullcnoppa (? hn-) m. _tuft of wool_, WW.

wulle = wull

wullen = wyllen

wullian _to wipe with wool_, #Lcd# 1·356^23.

wullic _woolly, hairy_.

wullmod m? _distaff_.

wulltewestre f. _wool-carder_, #Lcd#.

wulluc _cover, wrapper_, A 31·65.

wullw¯æga f. _scales for wool_, WW 148^21.

+wun = +wuna

±wuna I. m. (usu. +) _habit, custom, practice, rite_, _Bo_; Æ. on gew.
habban _to be accustomed to_. ['_i-wune_'] II. (+ only) _wonted,
customary, usual_.

wund I. f. _'wound,' sore, ulcer_, Æ, CP: _wounding, injury_, Æ. II.
adj. _wounded, sore_, AO.

wundel f. _wound_, LL, RB.

wundelîce = wundorlîce

wunden pp. of windan.

wundenfeax _with twisted mane_, B 1400.

wundenhals _with twisted prow_, B 298.

wundenlocc ¶ _with braided locks_.

wundenm¯æl _etched, damascened (of a sword)_, B 1531.

wundenstefna m. _ship with curved or wreathed prow_, B 220.

wunder = wundor

±wundian _to wound_, Æ, AO, CP.

wundiend '_vulnerator_,' ERHy 6^42.

wundiht, wundig _ulcerous, full of sores_.

wundle = wundel

wundlic _wounding, wound-inflicting_, GPH 402^51.

wundon pret. pl. of windan.

wundor (often confused with wuldor) n. (gs. wundres) _'wonder,' miracle,
marvel, portent, horror_, Æ, AO, CP: _wondrous thing, monster_.

wundoragræfen § _wondrously engraven_.

wundorbêacen n. _strange sign_.

wundorbebod n. _strange order_, B 1747.

wundorblêo n. _wondrous hue_, #Cr# 1140.

wundorclam n. _strange bond_, #Cr# 310.

wundor-clofe, -clufe f. _camphire (plant)_.

wundorcræft ¶ m. _wondrous skill, miraculous power_.

wundorcræftiglîce _with wondrous skill_, BH 324^3#o#.

wundord¯æd f. _wondrous deed_, #Bl#.

wundordêað m. _wondrous death_, B 3037.

wundorfæt (e^2) n. _wondrous vessel_, B 1162.

wundorful _wonderful_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

wundorgehwyrft (e^4) _wonderful turn_, GPH 390.

wundorgeweorc = wundorweorc

wundorgiefu f. _wondrous endowment_, #Wy# 72.

wundorh¯ælo (u^2) f. _wondrous healing_, BH 446^12.

wundorhûs? n. _'solarium,' upper room_, GD 119^26.

±wundor-l¯æcan, -lîcian _to make wonderful, magnify_.

wundorlic _wonderful, remarkable, strange_, Æ, AO, CP. adv. -lîce.

wundormâðm § m. _wonderful treasure_.

wundorsêon f. _wonderful sight_, B 995.

wundorsmið m. _skilled smith_, B 1681.

wundortâcen n. _wondrous sign_, #PPs# 104^23.

wundorweorc n. _wonderful work, miracle_.

wundorworuld f. _wonderful world_, #Rd# 40^17.

wundorwyrd f. _wonderful event_, #El# 1071.

wundres v. wundor.

±wundrian (w. g.) _to wonder, be astonished (at)_, _marvel_, Æ, AO, CP:
_admire_: _make wonderful, magnify_. [_Ger._ wundern]

wundrum adv. (d. of wundor) _wonderfully, strangely, terribly_.

wundrung f. _wonder, astonishment, admiration_, Æ: _spectacle_, OEG
4370.

wundswaðu (e) f. _scar_, #VPs# 37^6.

wundur == wundor

wundwîte n. _compensation for wounding_, LL 76#h#.

+wunelic _usual, customary_, Æ, CP. adv. -lîce, _BH_. ['_i-wuneliche_']

wunenes, wununes f. _dwelling, habitation_: _perseverance_, DR. [wunian]

wungynde = wuniende pres. ptc. of wunian.

wunian (±) _to inhabit, dwell, abide, exist_, Æ, AO, CP: (+) _remain,
continue, stand_, Æ, AO, CP: (±) _be used to, be wont to_: (+)
_habituate oneself to_, CP 73^14. [_Ger._ wohnen]

wunigend m. _inhabitant_, #RBl# 5^11.

+wunlic = +wunelic

wunn = wynn

wunnen pp., wunnon pret. pl., of winnan.

wunones = wunenes

wunsum = wynsum

wununes = wunenes

wunung f. _act of dwelling, living_, RB 108^3: _dwelling,
habitation_, Æ.

wunungstôw f. _abiding-place_, GD 31^19.

wuraðo (N) = wr¯æððo

wurcan = wyrcan

wurd == (1) wyrd; (2) word

wurdon pret. pl. of weorðan.

wurht, wurhton = worhte pret. sg., worhton pret. pl., of wyrcan.

wurm == wyrm

wurma m., wurme f. _murex, purple-fish_: _any dye, woad, purple_: _a
plant used for dyeing_.

wur-mille, -mele f. _wild marjoram_, #Gl#.

wurms = worms

wurnian = weornian

wurpan = weorpan

wurpul _that which throws down_, #Gl#.

wursm = worms

wurst = wierrest

wurt == wyrt

wurð == weorð

wurðe == weorð(e), wierðe

wurðig = worðig

wûscbearn n. _(dear) little child_, JnL 13^32. [wýscan]

wûso (JnR 13^33) = wûscbearn

wussung = wissung

wuta = wita

wutan = wuton

wutedlîce, wutodlîce (NG) = witodlîce

wuton 1 pers. pl. subj. of wîtan _to go_. used to introduce an
imperative or hortatory clause _let us...! come!_ CP.

wutu (M), wutum, wutun (N) = wuton

wutudlîce = witodlîce

wûðwuta (DR) = ûðwita

wýc == wîc

wyc- = wic-

wýd = wîd

wyd- = wud-

wyder- = wiðer-

wýf- = wîf-

wyglere = wiglere

wyht = wiht

wyhtel f. _quail_. [_Ger._ wachtel]

wyl- = weal-, wel-, wi(e)l-

wýl- = wîel-

wylcð pres. 3 sg. of wealcan.

wylf f. _she-wolf_.

wylfen I. adj. _wolfish_. II. f. _she-wolf, fury_, #Gl#.

wýliscmoru = wêalmoru  [[redirected to "wealhmoru"]]

wyll f. _wool_, LL (166n^4).

wyllen (i) _made of wool, woollen_.

wyloc = weoloc

wyn = wynn

wýn- = wîn-

wynbêam m. _tree of gladness, holy cross_, #El# 844.

wynblis f. _joy_, GD 2^4.

wynburh f. _delightful town_, #PPs# 127^2.

wyncondel f. _pleasant light, sun_, #Gu# 1186.

wyndæg ¶ m. _day of gladness_.

+wynde n. _weaving_, #Gl#.

wyndecræft m. _art of embroidery_, #Gl#.

wyndle f. _wound_, LL 381[23].

wyndrêam m. _jubilation_.

wyndrêamnes f. _jubilation_, #LPs# 150^5.

wyndrian = wundrian

wyne == wine

wynele m. _gladdening oil_, #PPs# 108^18.

wynfæst (e) _joyful_.

wynful _full of bliss, joyful_.

wyngesið m. _pleasant companion_, #PPs# 100^3.

wyngrâf mn. _delightful grove_, #PPs# 94^13.

wynigað (M) = wunigað pres. pl. of wunian.

wynland ¶ (o^2) n. _land of delight_.

wynlêas ¶ _joyless_.

wynlic _pleasant, beautiful, joyful_. adv. -lîce.

wynlust m. _sensual pleasure_, Æ.

wynm¯æg f. _winsome maiden_, #Gu# 1319.

wynn f. (occl. late as. wyn) _joy, rapture, pleasure, delight,
gladness_, AO [wine]

wynn- v. also wyn-, win(n)-.

wynnum _joyfully, beautifully_. [wynn]

wynpsalterium n. _psalm of joy_, #PPs# 56^10.

wynrôd f. _blessed cross_, #Sol# 235.

wynsang m. _joyful song_, W 265^31.

wynstaðol m. _joyous foundation_, #Rd# 92^3.

wynsum (e, i; once +wuns-) _'winsome,' pleasant, delightful, joyful,
merry_, Æ, CP.

+wynsumian _to rejoice, exult_, DR.

±wynsumlic adj. _pleasant, delightful_. adv. -lîce _pleasantly,
happily_, Æ.

wynsumnes (i) f. _loveliness, pleasantness, rejoicing_, Æ.

wynwerod n. _'chorus,' joyous band_, #Gl#.

wynwyrt f. _pleasant plant_, DD 5.

wynyng = wining

wyorðmynd (#Bl#) = weorðmynd

wýr == wîr

wyrc == weorc

wyrcan (e, eo, i) _to prepare, perform, do, make_, _'work,' construct,
produce, effect_, Æ, AO, CP. êastron w. _to keep Easter, eat the
passover_: _amount to_: (w. g.) _strive, after_: _deserve gain, win,
acquire_.

+wyrce n. _chitterlings (of pig)_.

wyrcend m. _worker, doer_, Æ.

wyrcnes f. _work, operation_, BH.

wyrcta (Ep, MtL) = wyrhta

wyrcung f. _working, work_, DR.

±wyrd f. (m? n?) _fate, chance, fortune, destiny_, Æ, AO: _Fate,
Providence_: _event, phenomenon, transaction, fact_: (+) _condition_.
['_wierd_'; weorðan]

wyrdan = wierdan

+wyrde I. n. _speech, conversation_: _eloquence, verbosity_:
_ordinance_. II. = +wyrðe

+wyrdelic _historical, authentic_, Æ. adv. -lîce _eloquently_:
_accurately, verbatim_: _wisely_, OEG 208.

+wyrdelicnes f. _eloquence_, A 13·38^1321.

wyrdgesceapum _by chance_, WW 400^25.

+wyrdignes f. _eloquence_, OEG 5488.

+wyrdlian = +wierdan

wyrdnes f. _condition, state_, #Bo# 128n.

wyrdstæf m. _decree of fate_, #Gu# 1325.

wyrdwrîtere m. _historian, chronicler_, Æ.

wyred = werod

wyregung = wyrgung

wyrest = wierrest

wyrfan = hwierfan

wyrg = wearg

wyrg- = werg-, wirg-, wyrig-

wyrgan I. _to strangle_, Æ. ['_worry_'] II. = wiergan

wyrgcwedol (e) _ill-tongued, given to cursing_.

wyrgcwedolian _to curse_, #VPs# (e).

wyrgcwedolnes (e^1, i^2) f. _cursing_, #Ps#.

wyrgcweðan (e) _to curse_.

wyrged (æ) _the devil_, NG.

-wyrgednes v. â-w.

wýrgels = wrîgels

wyrgend (e) m. _reviler, evildoer_.

wyrgende _given to cursing_, W 70^18.

wyrgðu (æ, e) f. _curse, condemnation, punishment_: _evil, wickedness_.

wyrgung (e) f. _curse, cursing, condemnation, banishment_, Æ.

+wyrht (eo) fn. _work, deed, service_: _desert, merit_, AO, CP. mid
gewyrhtum _deservedly_: _transgression_: (¶) _decree of fate_?

wyrhta m. _'wright,' artist, labourer, worker, maker, creator_, Æ, CP:
(+) _fellow-worker_: (+) _accomplice_.

wyri- = wearg-, wyrig-

wyrian = wiergan

wyricean = wyrcan

wyrig = werig

wyrig- = wearg-, wyrg-

wyrignes f. _abuse, cursing_.

wyrld = woruld

wyrm (eo, o, u) I. m. _reptile, serpent, snake, dragon_, Æ, AO: _'worm,'
insect, mite_. [wurma] II. = wearm

wyrma = wurma

wyrm¯æt = wyrm¯æte (I.)

wyrm¯æte I. f. _attack of worms, worm-eaten state_, A, #Lcd#. II. adj.
_worm-eaten_, #Lcd#.

±wyrman (æ, e, i) _to warm, make warm_.

wyrmbaso _red, scarlet_, OET 113^67.

wyrmcynn n. _serpent-kind, sort of serpent_, Æ, AO.

wyrmella = wurmille

wyrmfâh _adorned with figures of snakes, damascened_? B 1698.

wyrm-galdere, -galere (u) m. _snake-charmer_, Æ.

wyrmgealdor n. _a charm, against serpents_? #Lcd# 148a.

wyrmgeard m. _abode of serpents_, #Sol# 469.

wyrmgebl¯æd n. _swelling from snake-bite_? #Lcd# 162b.

wyrmh¯ælsere m. _diviner by serpents_, WW 441^35.

wyrmhîw n. _likeness of a serpent_, ÆL 10^104.

wyrmhord n. _dragon's hoard_, B 2222.

wyrmlîc n. _form of a serpent_.

wyrmmelu n. _worm-meal_, '_pulvis e vermibus confectus_,' #Lcd#.

wyrmrêad (u^1) _purple, scarlet_, Æ.

wyrms nm. _virus, corrupt matter_, Æ.

±wyrmsan _to fester_, CP.

+wyrmsed _purulent_.

wyrmsele m. _hall of serpents, hell_, #Jud# 119.

wyrmshr¯æcing f. _spitting up of matter_, WW 113^8?

wyrmsig (u) _purulent_, WW.

wyrmslite m. _snake-bite_, W 188^1.

wyrmsûtspîung f. _spitting up of matter_, WW 113^8?

wyrmwyrt f. _worm-wort_, #Lcd#.

wyrn = wearn

wyrnan = wiernan

wyrp m. _a throw, cast_, Lk 22^41.

wyrpan = wierpan

wyrpe (= ie) m. _revolution, change, recovery, relief, improvement_.
[weorpan]

+wyrpe n. _heap_? KC 5·78^29; Mdf.

wyrpel m. _jess (in falconry)_, #Wy# 87 (v. ES 37·195).

-wyrplic v. scort-w.

wyrpst, wyrpð pres. 2 and 3 sg. of weorpan and wyrpan.

wyrrest = wierrest

wyrs == wiers

wyrshr¯æcung = wyrmshr¯æcing

wyrsman = wyrmsan

wyrst = (1) wrist; (2) wierrest

wyrt (e, i) f. _herb, vegetable, plant, spice_, AO, CP: _crop_: _root_.
['_wort_']

wyrtbedd m. _bed of herbs_, #Lcd#.

+wyrtbox f. _herb or perfume box_.

wyrtbr¯æð m. _fragrance_, Æ.

wyrtcynn n. _species of plant_.

wyrtcynren n. _the vegetable world_, #LPs# 146^8.

wyrtdrenc m. _herbal drink, medicine_.

wyrteceddrenc m. _herbal acid drink_, #Lcd# 63b.

wyrtfæt n. _scent-bottle_, OEG.

wyrtforbor n. _restraint from action by the operation of herbs_ (BT),
#Lcd# 111b.

wyrtgælstre f. _witch who works with herbs_, #Lcd# 3·186^11.

wyrtgeard m. _(kitchen) garden_, #CPs# 143^13.

wyrt-gemang (Æ) n., -gemengnes f. _mixture of herbs, spices, perfume_.

wyrtgyrd = wyrtgeard

±wyrtian _to season, spice, perfume_.

wyrtig _garden-like_? _full of herbs_? ÆL 30^312.

wyrtmete m. _dish of herbs, pottage_, WW.

wyrt-rum, wyrt-(t)ruma m., -rume f. _root, root-stock_, CP: _origin,
beginning, stock_. [v. CC 68]

wyrtrumian _to take root_: (+) _root out_, DR.

wyrttûn, ±wyrtûn (Æ) m. _garden_.

wyrttûnhege f. _garden enclosure_, GD 67^18.

wyrtung f. a preparation of herbs, #Lcd# 1·342^25.

wyrtwala (i, eo, u^1; æ, e^2) m. _root, stock, base_.

wyrtwalian (æ^2) _to set, plant, root_: _root up_, #ÆGr#.

wyrtwalu f. = wyrtwala

wyrtweard m. _gardener_, GD 23; Jn 20^15.

wyrtwela = wyrtwala

wyrð == weorð

wyrðan _to irrigate with manure_, A 36·77.

+wyrðan I. (= ie) _to value, appraise_. II. = +weorðan

wyrðe = weorð

+wyrðe (= ie) n. _bulk, contents, amount_, #Lcd#.

wyrðeland = yrðland

wyrðig I. _fitting, deserved_, AO 256^11. II. = worðig

wyrðing m. _fallow land_? _cultivated land_? WW 495^20.

wyruld- = woruld-

wys- = wis(s)-

wýscan (î) (w. d. pers. and g. thing) _to 'wish,'_ Æ, AO, CP: _adopt_.

+wýscednes f. _adoption_, RBL 11^14.

+wýscendlic _desirable_, CM 109: _optative (mood)_, #ÆGr#. adv. -lîce.

+wýscing (î) f. _adoption_, RB 10^2.

wýsdôm (Æ) = wîsdôm

wyt = wit pron.

wyt- = wit-

wýt- = wît-

wytt = wit pron.

wytuma m. _paranymph_, A 13·30^82. [= witumbora? (BT)]

wyð- = wið-

wyxð pres. 3 sg. of weaxan.




=Y=


ybilberende (OEG 53^16) = yfelberende

ýcan, ýcean = îecan

yce f. _'parruca,' a kind of bird_, WW 468^22 (v. ANS 119·434).

ýce (î) fm. _toad, frog_.

ýcte pret. 3 sg. of ýcan.

ýdæges = îdæges

ýddisc n? _household stuff, furniture, possessions_, Æ. [êad]

ýde = êode

ýdel == îdel

ydes = ides

ýdisc = ýddisc

ýdl- = îdl-

yfæsdrype = yfesdrype

yfel I. adj. gsm. yfel(e)s _bad, ill_, _Bl, Lcd, Mt_: _'evil,' wicked,
wretched_, _Bl, CP, Mt_. comp. wiersa, wyrsa _worse_. superl.
wierrest(a), wiersta, weorsta, wyr(re)sta _worst_, Æ, AO. II. n.
_'evil,' ill, wickedness, misery_, _B, Bl, CP, G, VPs_.

yfelâdl f. _'cachexia,' consumption_, WW 113^13.

yfelberende (ybil-) _bringer of evil tidings_, OEG 53^16 (v. ANS
85·310).

yfelcund _evil, malignant_, #LPs#.

yfelcwedolian (ð) _to speak evil_, #ERPs# 36^22.

yfel-cweðende, -cweðelgiende (#EPs#) _evil-speaking_, #SPs# 36^23.

yfeld¯æd f. _ill deed, injury_, Æ.

yfeld¯æda m. _evildoer_, Æ.

yfeld¯æde _evil-doing_.

yfeldêma m. _wicked judge_, NC 335.

yfeldônd m. _evildoer_, JnL 18^30.

yfeldônde _evil-doing_, LL (424^20).

yfeldysig '_stultomalus_,' WW 165^18.

yfele = yfle

yfelful _malicious, wicked_, A 11·116^13.

yfelgiornes f. _malice, wickedness_, DR.

±yfelian _to inflict evil, hurt, wrong, injure_, _Ps_: _become bad, grow
worse, suffer_, _W_. ['_evil_']

yfelic, yfellic _evil, bad, foul, ugly_. adv. -lîce.

yfellærrende _persuading to evil_, GPH 390.

yfelnes f. _wickedness, depravity_, _Æ_; CP. ['_evilness_']

yfelsacend m. _blasphemer_ (eoful-).

±yfelsacian _to blaspheme_, #Bl# 189; GD 289.

yfelsacung f. _calumny, blasphemy_.

yfelsæc (eoful-) n? _blasphemy_, #El# 524.

±yfelsian (ebol-) _to blaspheme_.

yfel-spr¯æce, -sprecende _evil-speaking_.

yfelsung (ebol-) f. _blasphemy_.

yfeltihtend m. _inciter to evil_, Æ.

yfeltihtende _inciting to evil_, Æ.

yfelwillende _vicious_, Æ, CP.

yfelwillendnes f. _malice_, #LPs#.

yfelwilnian _to desire evil_, #LPs#.

yfelwoerc n. _evil deed_, DR 103^1.

yfelwyrcende _evil-doing_, Æ.

yfelwyrde _evil-speaking_, ES 39·354.

yfemest superl. adj. _highest, uppermost_, CP. [ufan]

yfera = yferra

yferdrype = yfesdrype

yferra comp. adj. _after, subsequent_: _higher_. [ufan]

yfes f. = efes

yfesdrype (æ^2) m. '_eaves-drop_,' _EC_ 141^16.

ýfig = îfig

yfle adv. (comp. wirs) _evilly, badly, ill, wrongly, miserably_, _G,
Ps_. ['_evil_']

±yflian = yfelian

yflung f. _injury_, GD 197^12.

yfmest = yfemest

ygett = iggað

ýgland = îgland

ýgðelîce = îeðelîce

ýhte = îhte

ýl = îl

ylca (Æ) = ilca

ylcian = elcian

yld == ield

yle = ile

ylf = ælf

ylfe = ielfe

ylfet, ylfetu, ylfette (Æ) = ilfetu

ylful (#HGl# 529) = ieldful

ylp m. _elephant_, WW; Æ. ['_elp_']

ylpen (i) _of an elephant_.

ylpen- = elpen(d)-

ylpesbân = elpendbân

yltsta = ieldesta wk. masc. superl. of eald.

yltwist f? _catching of birds_, WW 351^6.

ym- = ymb-, ymbe-

ymb = ymbe

ymbærnan _to travel round_, BH 28^8.

ymbbegang = ymbgang

ymbbeorgan^3 _to shield, defend_.

ymbberan^4 _to surround_.

ymbbîgnes (bebîg-) f. _bending round, bend, circuit, sweep (of a
river)_, BH 424^10. [bîegan]

ymbbindan^3 _to bind round_, MkL 9^42.

ymbbûgan^2 _to bend round_.

ymbcæfian _to embroider round, bedeck_.

ymbceorfan^3 _to circumcise_, NG.

ymbceorfnes f. _circumcision_, JnR 7^23 (-cernes).

ymbcerr (= ie) m. _turning about, going, migration_, NG:
_tergiversation, trickery_, DR.

ymbcerran = ymbcyrran

ymbclyccan _to enclose_, #RPs# 16^10 (v. ES 38·25).

ymbclyppan (i) _to embrace, clasp_, Æ.

ymbclypping f. _embracing_, OEG 4529 (emc-).

ymbcyme m. _assembly, convention_, LL 12 (ymc-).

ymbcyrran (e^2) _to turn round, go round, make the circuit of_:
_overturn, change_, NG.

ymbdringend = ymbhringend

ymbe I. prep. w. a. d. and adv. (of place) _around, about, at, upon,
near, along_, ¶_Chr_: (of time) _about, at, after, before_. ymb utan
_about, by, around_: (causal, etc.) _about, in regard to, concerning, on
account of, owing to_. ðæs y. lîtel _soon after_. y. bêon _to set about
a thing_. ['_embe_'] II. n. _swarm of bees_, #Lcd# 1·384^17; Mdf.

ymbe- = ymb-

ymbeaht mp. '_collatio_,' WW; OEG 53^22 (v. ES 11·492).

ymbeardian _to dwell round_, #VPs# 30^14.

ymbeb¯ætan _to curb, restrain_, #Met# 24^37.

ymbebêgnes = ymbbîgnes

ymbeornan = ymbiernan

ymbespr¯æc f. _conversation, comment, remark, criticism_, Æ.

ymbe-ðanc, -ðonc, -ðanca m. _thought, reflection_, CP.

ymbeðencan = ymbðencan

ymbeðridian _to deliberate, think about_, NC 335.

ymb-fær (embef-) n., -færeld (Æ) nm. _journey round, circuit_.

ymbfæstnes f. _enclosure_, DR.

ymbfæstnung f. _monument, tomb_, JnL 19^41.

ymbfæðmian _to embrace_.

ymbfaran^6 _to surround_, AO 80^26: _travel round_, GD 490^3.

ymbfeng I. m. _envelope, cover_, OEG 468. II. pres. 3 sg. of ymbfôn.

ymbfêran _to go about, journey round_, A 4·156; GPH 396.

ymbflêogan^2 _to fly around_.

ymbfôn^7 _to surround, encompass, embrace, grasp, seize_, AO.

ymbfrætewian _to decorate, surround with adornment_.

ymb-gan anv., -gangan^7 _to go round, surround_.

ymbgang (eo^2) m. _going about, circuit, circumference, surrounding
belt_, AO.

ymbgearwian _to clothe, dress_, NG.

ymbgedelf n. _digging round_, ÆH 2·408^11.

ymb-gefrætwian, -gefretwian (#VPs#) = ymbfrætewian

ymbgeong (N) = ymbgang

ymbgeoting? f. _pouring round_, OEG (in-, yn-).

ymbgerênian _to adorn or deck round_, #BlPs# 143^15.

ymb-gesett, -geseten _neighbouring_, BH 2·362.

ymbgesettan = ymbsettan

ymbgirdan = ymbgyrdan

ymbgong == ymbgang

ymbgyrdan (i) _to gird about, encircle, surround_, Æ.

ymbhabban _to surround_, AO: _include, contain_.

ymbhaga m. _enclosure for bees_, #Lcd# 1·395^4. [ymbe II.]

ymbhaldan = ymbhealdan

ymbhammen _surrounded, covered_, WW 340^14.

ymbhangen pp. of ymbhôn.

ymbhealdan^7 _to encompass_, #Sat# 7.

ymbhêapian _to heap round, crowd about_, WW.

ymbhêdig = ymbhýdig

ymbhegian _to hedge round_, Æ.

ymbhêpan = ymbhýpan

ymbhîwan (WW 381^2) = ymbhýpan

ymbhlennan (emb-) _to surround_, OEG 24.

ymbhoga m. _care, anxiety, solicitude, consideration_, CP.

ymbhogian _to be anxious about_, #LPs#.

ymbhôn^7 _to surround, deck, clothe_.

ymb-hringan _to surround, fence round_, CP: _wind round_, WW.

ymbhringend m. _attendant, member of a retinue_, #Gl#.

ymbhûung = ymbhýwung

ymbhwearft = ymbhwyrft  [[headword spelled "ymbhwyrf"]]

ymbhweorfan^3 (e^2, u^2) _to turn round, revolve go round, encompass_:
_tend, cultivate_, CP.

ymbhweorfnes f. _change, revolution_, DR 37^18.

ymbhweorft (e^2) = ymbhwyrft  [[headword spelled "ymbhwyrf"]]

ymbhwerf- (u^2, y^2) = ymbhweorf-

ymbhwyrf (e, ea, eo, i) m. _rotation, revolution, turn_: _circle,
extent, environment, circuit, orbit_, Æ, CP: _circle of the earth, orb,
globe, world_, Æ, AO: _region, district_: _cultivation_, Æ.

ymbhycgan _to think about, reflect on, consider_.

ymb-hýde-, -hýdi- = ymbhýdig-

ymbhýdig _anxious, solicitous, careful, suspicious_: _to be observed,
needing attention_, Æ. adv. -lîce.

ymbhýdiglic _anxious, careful, solicitous_. adv. -lîce.

ymbhýdignes f. _anxiety, solicitude_, Æ.

ymbhygd f. _anxiety_, #Bl#, GD.

ymbhygdig = ymbhýdig

ymbhýpan _to press round, assail_.

ymbhýwung (-hûung) f. _circumcision_, JnL 7^22.

ymbiernan^3 (io, y) _to run round_.

ymbl¯ædan _to lead round_, OET (VHy 7^18).

ymbl¯ærgian (emb-) _to provide with a rim, surround_, OEG 8^377. [l¯ærig]

ymblicgan^5 _to surround, enclose_, AO.

ymblîðan^1 _to sail round_, BH 408^25.

ymblôcian _to look round_, NG.

ymblofian _to praise_, #LPs# 116^1.

ymblyt m. _circle, circuit, circumference_, #Sat# 7?

ymbren n. _'Ember-'tide, Ember-day_, _Lk, LL_. [ymbryne]

ymbrendæg m. _Ember-day_.

ymbrene = ymbryne

ymbrenfæsten n. _periodical fast (at Ember-tide)_, Æ.

ymbren-wice, -wuce f. _Ember-week_, LL 78[43].

ymbrigdæg = ymbrendæg

ymbrine = ymbryne

ymbryne (e^2, i^2) m. _revolution, circuit, course, anniversary_, Æ:
_lapse of time_, Æ.

ymbscêawian _to look round_, NG.

ymbscêawiendlîce adv. _circumspectly_, BH 450^21.

ymbscêawung f. _'circumspectio,' looking round_, DR.

ymbscînan^1 _to shine round_, Æ.

ymbscrîðan^1 _to revolve about_, #Met# 20^208.

ymbscrýdan _to clothe_, Æ. [scrûd]

ymbscûwan _to screen, defend ('obumbrare')_, #EPs# 139^8.

ymbscýnan = ymbscînan

ymbsêan (N) = ymbsêon II.

ymbsellan _to surround, enclose, beset_, Æ.

ymbsêon I. sv^5 _to look round_. II. f. _beholding, regard_.

ymb-set, -setl n. _siege_.

ymbsetennes f. _siege_.

ymbsetnung f. _sedition_: _siege_.

ymbsett _neighbouring_, BH 362.

ymbsettan _to set round, surround, beset, encompass_, Æ: _plant_.

ymb-sierwan, -sirwan pres. 3 sg. -sireð _to design, plot_, CP: _lay in
wait for_.

ymbsittan^5 _to set round, surround, invest, besiege_, Æ, AO, CP: _sit
over, reflect upon_.

ymbsittend ¶ m. _one living near, neighbour_.

ymbsmêagung (embe-) f. _consideration_, WW 165^28.

ymbsnâð, ymbsniden, pret. 3 sg. and pp. of ymbsnîðan.

ymbsnidennes f. _circumcision_, Æ.

ymbsnîðan^1 _to circumcise_, Æ.

ymbspænning f. _allurement_, NC 335.

ymbspannan^7 _to span or clasp round, embrace_, BH 392^6.

ymbspr¯æc f. _conversation, comment, criticism_, Æ.

ymbspr¯æce § _spoken about, well known_.

ymbsprecan^3 _to speak about_, Lk 19^7.

ymbstandan^6 _to stand around, surround_.

ymbstandend m. _bystander_, Æ (emb-).

ymb-standennes, -standnes f. '_circumstantia_,' #Pss#.

ymbstrîcan _to smooth round_, #Lcd# 36b.

ymbstyrian _to stir about, overturn_, LkL 15^8.

ymbsw¯æpe f. _digression_, WW 5^28.

ymbswâpan^7 _to sweep round, environ_: _envelop, clothe_.

ymbswâpe = ymbsw¯æpe

ymbswîfan^1 _to revolve round_, NC 352.

ymbsyllan = ymbsellan

ymbsyrwan = ymbsierwan

ymb-trymian, -trymman (Æ, CP) _to surround_: _fortify, protect_.

ymbtrymming m. _fortification_, Æ.

ymbtýnan _to hedge round, surround_, W 146^27. [tûn]

ymbtyrnan _to turn round_: _surround_.

ymbðeahtian _to consider, reflect_, CP.

ymbðencan _to think about, consider_, CP.

ymbðonc = ymbeðanc

ymbðreodian (embðryd-) _to deliberate_, #Gl#.

ymbðreodung (i, y) f. _deliberation, consideration_.

ymbðringan^3 _to press round, throng about_.

ymbðringend = ymbhringend

ymbðrydung = ymbðreodung

ymbûtan prep. (w. a.) and adv. _around, about, outside, beyond_, AO, CP.

ymbw¯æfan _to clothe_, #LPs# 44^15.

ymbwærian _to turn (oneself) about, turn towards_, NG.

ymbweaxan^6 _to grow round, surround_, AO.

ymbwendan _to turn round_: _turn away, avert_.

ymbwendnes f. _transmutation, change_.

ymbwendung f. _reviving, quickening_: _behaviour_, DR.

ymbweorpan^3 _to surround_, #An# 1555.

ymbwîcigan _to surround, beleaguer_, #Ex# 65.

ymbwindan^3 _to clasp round, hold_: _wind round_.

ymbwlâtian _to contemplate_, Æ 145^12.

ymbwlâtung f. _contemplation_, Æ.

ymbwrîtan^1 _to score round, circumscribe_, #Lcd# 124a.

ymbwyrcan _to hedge in, wall in_, CP: _weave_, MtL 27^29.

ymbyrnan = ymbiernan

ymcyme = ymbcyme

ymel (æ, e) m. _weevil, mite, beetle, caterpillar_, #ÆGr#; GD (e).

ymele, ymle f. _scroll_, Æ.

ymen m. _'hymn,' sacred song_, _Bl, Pss_. [_L._ hymnus]

ymenbôc f. _book of hymns_, BH 484^23.

ymener = ymnere

ymensang m. _hymn_, GD, #AJPs#.

ymesêne _blind_, ÆH 1·418^22.

ymest = yfemest

ymle (Æ) = ymele

ymmon, ymn = ymen

ymnere m. _hymn-book_, _EC_ 250. ['_hymner_'; _L._ hymnarium]

ymnyttan = emnettan  [[redirected to "efenetan"]]

ýmon = ýmen  [[headword spelled "ymen"]]

ymryne = ymbryne

yn- = in-

ynce m. '_inch_,' _LL, Sol_. [_L._ uncia]

yndse f. _ounce_, AO: _piece of money, shekel_. [_L._ uncia]

yngrian = hyngrian  [[under "hyngran"]]

ynn- = inn-

ynnelêac (ene-, yne-, ynni-) n. _onion_, #Gl#.

ynse, yntse (Æ) = yndse

yplen (WW) = ypplen

±yppan _to bring out, open, manifest_: _disclose, display, reveal,
betray_, CP: _come forth, be disclosed_: (+) _utter_.

yppe I. (u) f. _upper room_: _raised place, high seat, tribune_: _stage,
platform_, WW 150^9. II. _evident, known, open, manifest_.

ypping f. _manifestation_: _accumulation, extent, expanse_? #Ex# 498.

yppingîren (ip-) n. _crowbar_? LL 455^15 (or ? cippingîren ANS 115·164).

ypplen n. _top, height_, OEG 2862.

ypte pret. 3 sg. of yppan.

ýr I. ¶ m. _name of the rune for =y=_: _bow_?: _gold_? _horn_? #Run# 27.
II. m. _back of axe_, #Chr# 1012.

yrcðu = iergðu

yrd = eard

yrd- = yrð-

ýre (pl. ôran) f. _a coin of Danish origin_, BC 3·371^2.

ýren = îren

yreðweorh (#Jul# 90?) = ierreðweorh

yrfan _to inherit_: _leave (by will)_.

yrfcwealm (a^2) m. _murrain_, #Chr# 986#ce#. [orf]

yrfe = ierfe

yrfebêc fp. _will, testament_, Æ.

yrfecwealm = yrfcwealm

yrfefyrst m. _legal formality or delay before entering on an
inheritance_, WW 115^3.

yrfegedâl n. _division of an inheritance_, Æ.

yrfegeflit n. _dispute about an inheritance_, EC 145^16.

yrfegewrit n. _will, testament, charter_, EC 145.

yrfehand (e^1) f. _natural successor_, EC 111^14.

yrfelâf f. _bequest, inheritance_: _heir_, #Ex# 403.

yrfeland n. _inherited land_, CP (ie).

yrfelêas _unprovided with cattle_, TC 162^27 (ie).

yrfe-numa, -nama (MF 179) mf. _heir, successor_, Æ.

yrfestôl ¶ m. _hereditary seat, home_.

yrfeweard m. _heir, son_, AO, CP (ie).

±yrfeweardian _to inherit_, #CLSPs#.

yrfeweardnes f. _heritage_, CP (ie).

yrfeweardwrîtere, yrfewrîtend m. _will writer, testator_, Æ.

yrfweard- = yrfeweard-

+yrgan = eargian

  [[main entry is ±eargian]]

yrgð, yrgðo, yrhðu = iergðu

yrm- = eorm-, ierm-

yrnan = iernan

yrre == ierre

yrs- = iers-

yrsebin f. _iron box_, LL 455[17] (?= îsern, BT).

yrð (ea; = ie) f. _ploughing, tilling_, LL: _standing corn, crop,
produce_, _BH_. ['_earth_']

yrðland (æ, ie) n. _arable land_, _CD, WW_; Æ. ['_earthland_']

yrðling (æ, e, eo, i) m. _husbandman, farmer, ploughman_, _WW_; Æ:
_wagtail_? ANS 119·434. ['_earthling_']

yrðtilia = eorðtilia

ys = is, v. wesan.

ýs == îs

ysel = esol

ysele = ysle  [[spelled "ýsle" under "ýsl"]]

ýsen = îsen

ýsern = îsern

ýsl, ýsle f. _spark, ember_, _Æ_. ['_isel_']

yslende _glowing_, WW 235^28.

ysope f., ysopo (indecl.) '_hyssop_,' _Æ, Lcd, VPs_.

ýst f. _storm, tempest, hurricane_, AO, CP.

ýstan _to storm, rage_, OEG.

ýstas = êstas np. of êst.

ýstig _stormy, of the storm_.

yt = itt pres. 3 sg. of etan.

ýtan I. _to drive out, banish_, #Chr# 1058#d#: _squander, dissipate_, RB
55^4. [ût] II. = ûtan

Ytas = Iotas  [[headword spelled "Îotas"]]

ýtemest superl. adj. _uttermost, extreme, last_, AO, CP. on ýtemestum
sîðe '_in extremis_.' [ûte]

ýtend m. _devastator_, WW 232^37.

yteren _made of otter-skin_, AO 18^21. [otor]

ýterra = ûterra  [[under "ûtera"]]

yteð = iteð, pres. 3 sg. of etan.

ýting f. _outing, journey_, Æ.

ýt-mest, -mæst = ýtemest

ytst, ytt = itst pres. 2 sg., itt pres. 3 sg., of etan.

ýttera, ýttra = ûter(r)a

ýð I. f. _wave, billow, flood_, Æ, CP: (¶) _sea_: _liquid, water_. II. =
îeð

ýð- = êað-, îeð-

ýðan = (1) îðan; (2) ýðgian

ýðbord n. _ship_? _ship's side_? #Cra# 57.

ýðeg = ýðig

ýðegan = ýðgian

ýðfaru ¶ f. _wave-course, flood_.

ýðgebland ¶ n. _wave-mixture, surge_.

ýðgewinn ¶ n. _wave-strife, life in the waves_.

ýðgian _to fluctuate, flow, surge_, CP: _roar, rage_.

ýðgung = ýðung

ýðhengest m. _(wave-horse), ship_, #Chr# 1003#e#.

ýðhof ¶ n. _water-dwelling, ship_.

ýðian (Æ) = ýðgian

ýðig _billowy, stormy_, ÆL 16^70.

ýðlâd f. _sea-voyage_, B 228.

ýðlâf ¶ f. _sand, shore, beach_.

ýðlid ¶ n. _ship, vessel_.

ýðlida m. _wave-traverser, ship_, B 198.

ýðmearh ¶ m. _sea-horse, ship_.

ýðmere m. _ocean of waves_, #Ph# 94.

ýðung f. _agitation, commotion_, Æ: _inundation_, Æ.

ýðwôrigende _wandering on the waves_, WW 243^3.

ýwan, ýwian = îewan




CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


ERRATA

Errors in Anglo-Saxon words were treated more conservatively than those
in the modern text. The most common change was adding or removing a
macron in cross-references:

  Printed text
    mês (K) = mýs, v. mus.
  Cross-referenced entry
    mûs f. gs. mûs, mûse, nap. mýs '_mouse_,' ...

Since both headwords have a long vowel, the cross-reference was changed
to match. All apparent errors, whether corrected or not, are listed
below in [[double brackets]]. The author's corrections and additions are
not repeated unless there is an error in the correction itself.

Most errors are trivial, such as missing or incorrect punctuation or
misplaced italics. The word "invisible" in corrections means that there
is an appropriately sized blank space in the printed text. Punctuation
at the end of entries was silently regularized, and missing or invisible
periods (full stops) after standard abbreviations such as "m." or "pl."
were silently supplied. Other errors in punctuation or typography are
listed separately, after the more substantive errors.

In references to the OED ("New English Dictionary"), hyphenization does
not always correspond to the OED form. These inconsistencies were left
as printed; words split at line-end were not generally checked against
their OED form.


Abbreviations:

  #Sc# = Defensor's Liber Scintillarum
    [[_printed SC in list, but always #Sc# in body text_]]


Author's Additions and Corrections:

  ærendung ...  [[_body text has "¯ærendung"_]]
  âsanian ...  [[_body text has "âsânian"_]]
  +bearded _having a beard_ ...  [[_r in "beard" invisible_]]
  besceawere ...  [[_body text has "bescêawere"_]]
  cwême- = cwêm-  [[cwem-]]
  +fadung ...  [[_body text has "±fadung"_]]
  flogettan ...  [[_body text has "floggettan"_]]
  forecweden _aforesaid_, GD 12; 344. [[_error for 344^12?_]]
  forlætednes (GD 227^16) = forlætennes  [[_error for ¯æ in both?_]]
  hûselbox ...  [[huselbox]]


Dictionary Text:

  âblisian (Æ) = âblysian  [[âblýsian]]
  âc¯ægan = âcîgan [[acîgan]]
  âcwînan^1 ...  [[acwînan]]
  ¯æcelma m. _chilblain_, OEG, WW.  [[æcelma]]
  ¯æfæst = ¯æwfæst  [[æwfæst]]
  ¯æhw¯ær, -hwâr = âhw¯ær  [[âhwær]]
  æig = æg  [[error for "¯æg"?]]
  ¯ælc [êlc, ylc (#VPs#); v. '_each_']  [[elc]]
  ¯ænlêp- = ânlêp-  [[ânlep-]]
  ¯æscære _unshorn, untrimmed_. [scieran]  [[error for "¯æsc¯ære"?]]
  ¯æst¯ænan = âst¯ænan  [[âstænan]]
  ¯ætere (ê^1) m. _'eater,' glutton_, _Prov_; NG.  [["Prov" unchanged]]
  âgryndan  [[âgrýndan]]
  âlifian = âlibban  [[alibban]]
  âlýfed- = âlîefed-  [[alîefed-]]
  anihst ¶ _last, in the last place_.  [[error for "anîhst"?]]
  âracsian = ârâsian  [[ârasian]]
  ârgifa m. _giver of benefits_, #Cra# 11.  [[#Craft#]]
  âsceortian = âscortian  [[ascortian]]
  âsparian _to preserve_, GD 159^24.  [[âspariân]]
  âðêstrian = âðêostrian  [[aðêostrian]]
  âðrescan = âðerscan  [[aðerscan]]
  âwârnian ...  [[error for "âwarnian"?]]
  awel m. _hook, fork_, #Gl#.  [[error for "âwel"?]]
  âwendedlic = âwendendlic  [[âwendendlîc]]
  âwierg-an, -ian ... _Æ, Mt, CP_; VPs.  [[VP]]

  -bâdere v. nîed-b.  [[nied-b.]]
  ben¯æman ... [niman]  [[nîman]]
  bîgegnes = bîgengnes  [[bigengnes]]
  bisæc n? m? _wallet_, MtR 10^10. [_L._ bisaccium]  [[LL.]]
  bisceophâd ... _CPPs_.  [[error for _CPs, PPs_?]]
  blêoh = blêo  [[bleoh]]
  brêostgebeorh m. _bulwark_, WW 466^14.  [[breostgebeorh]]
  brycgwyrcende '_pontifex_'! DR 194^16.
    [[exclamation mark in original]]
  býgel = bêogol  [[beogol]]
  +byrðtid = +byrdtîd  [[error for "+byrðtîd"?]]
  byrððînenu f. _midwife_, GPH 392.  [[error for "-ðinenu"?]]

  ceîce (MtLR) = cêace  [[error for "ceice"?]]
  cellender n., cellendre f. = celendre  [[= cellendre]]
  cîepehûs (¯æ^1) n. _storehouse_, WW 186^11.  [[cîepehus]]
  clâ = clêa, clawu  [[clâwu]]
  crîsten m. crîst(e)na f. '_Christian_,' _AO_.  [[crîst(e)na m.]]
  cwelm = cwealm (but v. MFH 106), cwielm-  [[- missing or invisible]]

  d¯ædbôtnes = d¯ædbêtnes  [[d¯ædbetnes]]
  dægrima m. _dawn, daybreak, morning_, _Æ_. [['_day-rim_']]
    [[dayrim _i.e. misprinted as simple cross-reference rather than
    OED citation_]]
  drohtung f.  [[drohtnung]]
  +dýrsian ... [dîere]  [[diêre]]

  êacan = îecan  [[eâcan]]
  ealdlandr¯æden  [[ealdlandræden]]
  earcnanstân = eorcnanstân  [[eorsnanstân]]
  êarelipprica = êarliprica  [[êarliprîca]]
  êastan, êastane  [[eastane]]
  êaðmêde = (1) êaðmôd, (2) êaðmêdu  [[eaðmêdu]]

  fâmblâwende v. lîg-f.  [[lig-f.]]
  -felma v. ¯æger-f.  [[æger-f.]]
  fêrbl¯æd = f¯ærbl¯æd  [[færbl¯æd]]
  -fyrede v. twi-, ðri-f.  [[-fýrede]]
  fyrhtnes f. _fear_, AO.  [[fryhtnes]]

  gabote (u^2) f. _side-dish_, #EGl#. [[_L._ gabata]]
    [[#EGl# printed as shown: error for Erf?]]
  gýt ... II. = gîet  [[giet]]
  gorettan ... _pour forth, emit_, GPH 398.  [[pour fourth]]
  gûðfona = gûðfana  [[guðfana]]
  gûðgetâwe = gûðgeatwe  [[guðgeatwe]]

  hengetrêow (enge-) n. _gallows_, GPH 395.  [[hengetreow]]
  heregeatland n. _heriot-land_, LL 220.  [[L 220]]
  hîo v. hê.  [[he]]
  hit v. hê. ['_it_']  [[hît]]
  hlâford-swîcung (MFN 167; W 225^28)  [[MFN as shown]]
  +hnyst _contrite_, ¶#PsC# 127.  [[error for #CPs#?]]
  hr¯æron pret. pl. of hrêran.  [[hreran]]
  hrýst pres. 3 sg. of hrêosan.  [[hêosan]]
  hundtwelftig num. _hundred and twenty_, Æ, AO.
    [[error for "hundred and twelve"?]]
  hweder = hwider  [[hwîder]]
  -hwielfan (e, y) v. â-, be-, of-hw. [hwealf]  [[bê-]]
  hwîlum ... [['_whilom_']]
    [[whilom _i.e. misprinted as simple cross-reference rather than
    OED citation_]]
  ±hyscan (ea, i)
    [[spelled "hýscan" in 3 of 5 cross-references, compound "onhýscan";
    first edition also has "hýscan"]]

  îgbûend = îegbûend  [[îegbuend]]
  innâwritting (_LkL_) = onwrîting  [[onwriting]]

  l¯ægt = lîget  [[liget]]
  -l¯ænung v. feoh-l.  [[fêoh-l.]]
  -læppede v. fîf-l.  [[fif-l.]]
  lêasbregd == lêasbrêd  [[leasbrêd]]
  -lendisc v. dûn-, ûp-, ûre-, ût-l.  [[up-, ûre-, ut-l.]]
  lîming f. _smearing, plastering_, _WW_. ['_liming_']  [[_limîng_]]

  magogeoguð f. _youth_, #Cr# 1429.  [[#Cri#]]
  manðêof m. _man-stealer_, v. LL 2·542.  [[L 2·542]]
  mealehûs = meluhûs  [[meluhus]]
  megol == meagol  [[meago]]
  mês (K) = mýs, v. mûs.  [[mus]]
  mûha (_Cp_) = mûga  [[muga]]

  nêad- v. also nîed-, nýd-.  [[nîed]]
  nîge- = nigo-  [[error for "nige-"?]]
  +nycled (#Gl#) = +cnycled  [[+cyncled]]

  ongefæstnian = onfæstnian  [[onfæstian]]
  onhýscan (î) ... [hûsc]  [[husc]]
  oportanie = aprotane  [[aprôtane]]
  ôsle f. ... [amsel]  [[error for "_Ger._ amsel"?]]

  +r¯ædelîce = +r¯ædlîce  [[+rædlîce]]
  rîning = hrîning  [[hrînung]]

  -sagol v. lêas-, sôð-, wær-s.  [[w¯ær-s.]]
  sâh ... II. pret. 3 sg. of sêon.  [["of" missing]]
  -sânian v. â-s.  [[a-s.]]
  scêofan = scûfan  [[scufan]]
  scêwyrhta = scêowyrhta  [[sceowyrhta]]
  scofen pp. of scufan.  [[error for "scûfan"?]]
  searocêne _very bold_, ¶#PsC# 10.  [[error for "#CPs#"?]]
  sêoc ... _FAp, Gu_.  [[FatAp]]
  -sêoung (êu) v. êag-s.  [[eag-s.]]
  -snæcce v. twi-s.  [[twî-s.]]
  swýwian = sûgian, swîgian  [[error for "sugian"?]]

  tilia, tilig(e)a (y) m. _tiller, workman, hand ..._  [[hind]]
  tôcleofian = tôclifian  [[toclifian]]
  tôgenêal¯æcan = tônêal¯æcan  [[tôneal¯æcan]]
  tôscyl-lan, -ian  [[tôrscyl-lan]]
  trilidi = ðrilîði  [[i and î mismatched as shown]]
  twýlic (Æ) = twêolic  [[tweolic]]
  tymp- = timp-  [[tymb-]]

  ðegnlic _noble, brave, loyal_, Æ. adv. -lice.
    [[printed as shown: error for "-lîce"?]]
  ðêowen, ðêowene = ðêowe  [[ðeowe]]
  ðrêanýd == ðrêanîed  [[ðrêanied]]

  un-âræfned, -âræfne(n)dlic  [[un-aræfned]]
  unscæðð-ende (e), -ig _innocent, harmless_.  [[unscæðð-ênde]]
  unscyldiglic ... #Bk# 12.  [[Bk]]
  unsidelice _immodestly_, NC 330.
    [[printed as shown: error for "-lîce"?]]
  untô-d¯ælend-, d¯æl-, dâl-, -dêlen- = untô-d¯æled-  [[untô-dæled-]]
  unwerlîce = unwærlîce  [[unwærlice]]
  ûpyrne = ûpryne  [[upryne]]

  wæglîðende ¶ _seafaring_.  [[error for "w¯æglîðende"?]]
  wâgrift (e, y) n. _wall-hanging, tapestry, vail, curtain_.
    [[variant spelling of "veil"?]]
  wan I. (once +; o) (usu. indecl. and used predicatively)  [[undecl.]]
  wealhhâfoc m. _foreign hawk, falcon_.  [[error for "-hafoc"?]]
  wîdobân = wiðobân  [[error for "widobân"?]]
  wiflêast f. _lack of women_, ÆL 10^216.  [[error for "wîfleast"?]]
  wînhrêafetian _to gather grapes_, #LPs# 79^13.  [[winhrêafetian]]
  wurma ... _any dye, woad, purple_  [[any die]]

  ymb-hýde-, -hýdi- = ymbhýdig-  [[ymb-hýde]]
  ysope f., ysopo (indecl.) '_hyssop_,' _Æ, Lcd, VPs_.  [[VP]]


Punctuation and Typography:

  âbûfan (= on-) adv. _above_, #Chr# 1090#e#.  [[1090E]]
  âc ... _name of the rune for =a=_.
    [[italicized to match other "rune for" entries]]
  âcennednes (_WG_; _Æ_)   [[punctuated and italicized as shown]]
  âdel I. = âdl.  [[âdl;]]
  âdrêosan^2 _to fall to pieces, decline, vanish, fail_.
    [[, after "vanish" invisible]]
  adûnweard adv. _downwards_, _ChrL_. ['_a-downward_']
    [[hyphen in "a-downward" invisible]]
  ¯æc I. f. = âc.  [[âc;]]
  æfse I. = efes.  [[efes;]]
  æl- prefix = I. eal(l)-.  [[eal(l)-;]]
  ¯ærist I. (ê) mfn. _rising_, _VPs_  [[_rising_ _VPs_]]
  âlîes-ednes, -(e)nes (ê, ý) f. _redemption, ransom_, _MtWLR_:
    [[_MtWL, R_]]
  andfeng (on-) m. _seizing, receiving, taking_,
    [[_seizing, receiving, taking_.]]
  ânemnan _to announce, declare_, _Gu_. ['_aname_']
    [[close quote missing]]
  arblast m. _cross-bow_, #Chr# 1079#d#. [_OFr._ arbaleste]  [[O.Fr.]]
  æsc ... _name of the rune for =æ=_.
    [[italicized to match other "rune for" entries]]
  âwirgan = I. âwyrgan.  [[âwyrgan;]]

  bânrift (y) n. _leggings, leg-armour, greaves_, #Gl#, WW (-rist).
    [[, after "greaves" invisible]]
  bêah I. = bêag. II. pret. 3 sg. of bûgan.  [[bêag II.]]
  beccen m. _buyer_, WW (#KGl#) 75^36. [= bycgend]  [[KG]]
  ±bed ... II. = bedd.  [[bedd]]
  ±beorh I. == beorg.  [[beorg]]
  berêfian (#KGl#) = berêafian  [[KG]]
  besmocian _to smoke, envelop with incense_, ANS 84·3.  [[#Ans#]]
  betrendan _to roll_, ES 37·180.  [[_to roll_ ES]]
  betst ... _AO, Chr, Cr_  [[CR]]
  +bregd I. n. _movement, change_, #Ph# 57. II. = br¯æd III.  [[PH]]
  broc ... _WW_.  [[. after "_WW_" invisible]]
  býg- = bî-, bê-, bîg-  [[bî, bê-]]

  cêas I. = cêast.  [[cêast;]]
  ±cîdan (w. d. or wið) _contend, quarrel_  [[open parenthesis missing]]
  clomm I. m. = clamm.  [[clamm]]
  cnêow I. (êo) n. '_knee_,' _AO, Bl, El, Mt_:  [[Ao]]
  ±crêopan^2 (occly. refl.)  [[occly refl.]]
  cwellere ... _BH, Mk_; Æ. ['_queller_']  [[MK]]
  cwene f. _woman_, _Rd, W_: ...  [[_Rd, W_;]]
  ±cwician ... ['_quick_']  [[close quote missing]]
  ±cynd ... _gender_, _Ph_:  [[ge in "gender" invisible]]

  dæg ... ofer midne d. _afternoon_.  [[_afternoon_,]]
  dêaf I. ... _empty, barren_, ...
    [[_empty, barren_.]]
  dêopnes f. _depth, abyss_, _LPs, Nic_:  [[_LPs, Nic_.]]
  ±dôn ... betre, furðor d. _prefer_.  [[furðor, d.]]
  dûnlic _of a mountain, mountain-dwelling_, WW 376^6.
    [[, after "dwelling" invisible]]
  ±dwola ... _madman, deceiver, heretic_, _Æ, Bl_:  [[BL]]
  dýpan ... _anoint_, #EPs# 140^5  [[_anoint_ #EPs#]]

  +efenlîcian ... #AV^2Ps# 25^3.  [[printed as shown]]

  f¯ærdêað m. _sudden death_, WW 351^19.  [[, after "death" invisible]]
  feðriht _feathered_, MtL p7^17.  [[_feathered_.]]
  fîftig num. '_fifty_,' _Æ_: sb. _a set of fifty_, _Mk_.
    [[_a set of fifty_.]]
  fitt ... v. #SkED# under fit (2)  [[#SkED.#]]
  fl¯æsc (ê) n. '_flesh_,' _Æ, Cp, Lk, VP_; CP:  [[error for "VPs"?]]
  forgrindet n. _grinding, pounding_, Cp 776#c#.  [[Cp.]]
  forðframian _to grow to maturity_, WW 465^10.
    [[_to grow to maturity_.]]
  fullendian _to complete_, _BH_. ['_fullend_']  [[close quote missing]]
  fýran I. = fêran.  [[fêran]]
  fýrtang f. '_(fire-)tongs_,' A 9·263.  [[printed ('fire-)tongs,']]

  gamen ... _B, Bo_; Æ, CP.  [[BO]]
  gêargetal (æ^1) n. _number of years_, #Lcd# 2·284.
    [[_number of years_ #Lcd#]]
  geond-spurnan, -spyrnian _to cause to stumble_, NG.
    [[_to cause to stumble_ NG.]]
  grimmân n. _terrible sin_, BH 50^8#b#.  [[50, 8#b#]]
  gristbitian ... ['_gristbite_']  [[printed '[gristbite'] ]]

  hâdor ... (or ? hador = heaðor)  [[hador, =]]
  hearg (æ, e) nap. heargas, (e)  [[heargas, e _without parentheses_]]
  hlêofæst _consoling, protecting_, #Cr#, RB.  [[CR]]
  hoferede _humpbacked_, _CP, Lcd, WW_. ['_hovered_']
    [[. after "CP, Lcd, WW" invisible]]
  holm ... in prose, esp. in place-names
    [[mismatched close parenthesis after "place-names":
    error, or missing open parenthesis before first "esp."?]]
  hrurul '_deciduus_,' BDS 30·11^33.  [[#BDs#]]
  hûsul- = hûs(e)l-  [[hûs(e)l]]

  lætnes f. _slowness, delay_, ÆL 23b^647: _sloth_, GD 174^23.
    [[, after "_sloth_" invisible]]
  lâf ... tô lâfe _alone_.  [[_alone_,]]
  lêag ... _Ep, Lcd_.  [[d in "Lcd" invisible]]
  lêohtian I. _to be lightened, relieved_.  [[t in "to be" invisible]]
  lêohtlic I. _light, of little weight or importance_, Æ, CP.
    [[, after "importance" invisible]]
  lêon I. (sv^1) _to lend, grant_. [[_Ger._ leihen]]
    [[i in "leihen" invisible]]
  listan = lystan  [[l in "listan" invisible]]
  ±lôme ... oft (and) +l. _constantly, diligently_.
    [[second t in "constantly" invisible]]
  ±lûtan^2 _to bend, stoop, decline_, Æ, AO:  [[: after "AO" invisible]]
  +lygnod _perjured_, Æ (i).
    [[printed as continuation of "lygnian" entry]]

  +mæcca ... _husband, wife_, _Æ, Mt, OET_.  [[_husband, wife_.]]
  +m¯æl _stained, dyed_, #An# 1333.  [[AN]]
  m¯æne ... III. _false, mean, wicked_.  [[. after "wicked" invisible]]
  mæssecrêda m. _creed said at mass, Nicene creed_.  [[mass. Nicene]]
  marman-stân ... _Æ, Bl_. ['_marmstan_']  [[missing . after "Æ, Bl"]]
  mâse f. _name of a small bird_, #Gl#.  [[_... bird_ #Gl#.]]
  mâðmcyst f. _treasure-chest_, Mt 27^6.
    [[, after "treasure-chest" invisible]]
  mâðmhûs n. _treasure-house, treasury_, AO, CP.  [[AO. CP.]]
  môt ... III. pres. sg. of *môtan.
    [[printed "_pres._ sg." in italics]]
  munucbehât n. _monastic vow_, HL 18^81,95.  [[18,^81,95]]

  nâgan* ... AO. nâhte _ought not_.  [[AO nâhte]]
  nâhtnes f. _worthlessness_, #Chr# 449#a#.  [[449a _lower case_]]
  nîehst ... _CP, Chr, KC, MkL_ (ê).  [[CP not italicized]]
  nytennes (e, i) f. _ignorance, laziness, ignominy_, Æ.
    [[, after "ignominy" invisible]]

  ofer-gân ... _Æ, An_:  [[: after "_Æ, An_" invisible]]
  ô-hw¯ær = â-hw¯ær  [[-â-hw¯ær]]
  onlîcnes f. _resemblance, likeness, similitude_, _Gen_:  [[Gen.:]]
  onrîsan (_Æ_) = ârîsan. ['_onrise_']  [[missing . after "ârîsan"]]
  onweald ... _jurisdiction, territory_, CP.  [[missing . after "CP"]]
  onwegâcyrrednes, -cyrnes f. _apostasy_, BH 176 (_v.l._).
    [[anomalous italics in "v.l."]]

  prêostlagu f. _ecclesiastical law, canon law_, LL 380[2,3].
    [[, after "canon law" invisible]]

  râw (_Lcd_ 89b) = r¯æw. ['_row_']  [[r¯æw ['_row_'].]]
  rihtwîslic _righteous_, CP  [[_righteous_ CP]]
  ryplen? _made of broom_. [A 31·536]
    [[_made of broom_ [A 31·536]. ]]

  sagu (±) ... II. f. _'saw' (tool)_, _A, WW_.
    [[l in "tool" invisible]]
  sâh I. ... II. pret. 3 sg. of sêon.
    [[s in "sâh" and "sêon" both invisible]]
  samen adv. _together_, JnR (o^1).  [[, after "together" invisible]]
  scêawung ... AO, CP:  [[AO. CP:]]
  ±scencan ... Æ, CP. ['_shench_'; _Ger._ schenken]  [[Æ. CP.]]
  scernicge (= ie) f. _actress, female jester_, _A_;  [[_A_,]]
  scîmian _to shine, glisten_, _ÆGr, LkL_:  [[ÆGr. LkL]]
  scînnes I. f. _radiance_, MkL 13^24. II. = scîenes  [[#MkL#]]
  scipforðung f. _equipment of ships_, LL 314[´].
    [[bracketed [´] in original]]
  scopgereord (eo^1) n. _language of poetry_, BH.
    [[, after "poetry" invisible]]
  sittan^5 ... _Æ, B, Bo, Bl, Chr_; AO, CP  [[Bl. Chr]]
  +slêfed _furnished with sleeves_. ['_sleve_']
    [[printed as continuation of "slêfan" entry]]
  snôca m. _nook_? _inlet_, BC 3·141´ (v. Mdf).  [[_inlet_ BC]]
  ±swâpan^7 _to sweep, drive, swing, rush (of wind)_.
    [[f in "of" invisible; close parenthesis missing]]

  ±temprian ... _Æ_ (refl.), _Lcd, Sc_.  [[_Lcd Sc_.]]
  ±trûwian ... _to trust_, _Æ, CP, JnL_.  [[_to trust_ _Æ, CP, JnL_.]]
  tungolgim m. _(bright) star_, #Cr# 1151.
    [[open parenthesis invisible]]
  twig n. _'twig,' branch, sprout, shoot, small tree_, Æ, CP.
    [[, after "tree" invisible]]
  twiscyldig _liable to a double penalty_, LL 90#h#.
    [[first l in "liable" invisible]]

  ðêote f. ... _conduit, pipe_, Æ. [ðêotan]  [[_conduit, pipe_.]]
  ðrîst, ðrîste ... _audacious, shameless_, _CP, W_.
    [[_audacious, shameless_.]]

  unacumenlicnes f. _unbearableness_, RBL 114^9.  [[#RBl#]]
  unârlic ... _contrary to what is fitting, unnatural (of a will)_, WW.
    [[first l in "will" invisible]]
  under-bæc, -bæcling  [[under-bæc.]]
  underðêodan ... Æ, CP: _support_, OEG 4339.  [[Æ, CP _support_]]
  unmiltsigendlic _unworthy of compassion, unpardonable_, Æ. [milts]
    [[_unworthy of compassion. unpardonable_.]]
  unondcýðignes f. _ignorance_, #JVPs# 24^7.
    [[_ignorance_ #JVPs#]]
  unræfniendlic _intolerable_, #SPs# 123^4 (on-).
    [[l in "unræfniendlic" invisible]]
  ûser I. poss. pron. gen. ûsses _our_.
    [[first s in "ûsses" invisible]]

  wamwyrcende (o) _worker of sin_, #Cr# 1093.  [[CR]]
  wealca ... _light floating garment_.  [[l in "_light" invisible]]
  weall ... Æ, AO, CP; Mdf:  [[Æ AO, CP]]
  weallsteall m. _wall-place, foundation_? #Wa# 88.  [[#Wand#]]
  +wêde n. _fury, rage, madness_, Æ. [wôd]
    [[_fury, rage, madness_ Æ.]]
  weg I. (æ) m. _'way,' direction_, Æ, AO:  [[Æ AO:]]
  weorccræft m. _mechanics_, OEG 55^6.  [[_mechanics_ OEG]]
  weorc-uhta? ... _hour of matins on a non-festival day_, NC 332
    [[_... day_ NC]]
  ±wîcian ... _encamp, bivouac_, CP:  [[_encamp, bivouac_.]]
  wiersa m., wierse fn. (comp. of yfel)  [[close parenthesis missing]]
  +wif ... II. n. _a disease of the eye_, #Lcd#
    [[_a disease of the eye_ #Lcd#]]
  willsele m. _pleasant dwelling_, #Ph# 213.
    [[_pleasant dwelling_ #Ph#]]
  +winnesful = +winful  [[ul in "winful" invisible]]
  ±winnstow f. _wrestling place_.  [[lin in "wrestling" invisible]]
  winnung = windung  [[g in "windung" invisible]]
  wînreced ¶ n. _wine-hall_. [[e-h in "wine-hall" invisible]]
  wiðerwinna m. _opponent, rival, adversary, enemy_, Æ, AO, CP.
    [[adversary enemy]]
  wôl ... AO, CP.  [[AO.]]
  wrang I. n. _'wrong,' injustice_. [_ON._ rangr]
    [[close bracket after "rangr" invisible]]
  wrangwîs _perverse_, OEG 1770.  [[_perverse_ OEG]]
  wyrcung f. _working, work_, DR.  [[_working work_]]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, by 
John R. Clark Hall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CONCISE ANGLO-SAXON DICTIONARY ***

***** This file should be named 31543-8.txt or 31543-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/4/31543/

Produced by Louise Hope, Zoran Stefanovic, the Germanic
Lexicon Project, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
